And um, we can repeat one of the two which we have already learned and learn a new one. Uh, the recording of mantra but how to play it, uh, the the computer… The computer… Well, that we can do maybe some extra, uh, thing. Yeah, yeah. The two, then we can do this. I have this on the computer. Computer. I have this already on the computer. On the computer. Played. We can play this anytime. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. So maybe can do it outside, uh, the class. Either either in the evening or or if you if everything is prepared… Yeah, then we can then we'll close the class and the mic to be comfortable. Yeah. Yeah.

Again the *saṁśayambhūti*… Again the *saṁśayambhūti* *m hūti samutthanāviniṁ* *samutthanāviniṁ* *vande vicitrāpadāṁ* *vande vicitrāpadāṁ* *citrāṁ* *citrāṁ* *taṁ guru pārvatīṁ* *taṁ guru pārvatīṁ*. Again the *saṁśayambhūti*… Again the *saṁśayambhūti* *samutthanāviniṁ* *samutthanāviniṁ* *vande vicitrāpadāṁ* *vande vicitrāpadāṁ* *citrāṁ* *citrāṁ* *taṁ guru pārvatīṁ* *taṁ guru pārvatīṁ*. 

Perfect. Well, we'll try again this mantra. Yeah. 

Uh, but still, I would prefer to try another one that is *viśrānti*, in the second piece. Is this connected? Because we all the time dealing with *śakti* and this is a beautiful quotation from some other text, *Mahānayaprakāśa*, that the Supreme Goddess is *viśrānti*, repose, because we have this, uh, root *śam* all the time. *Śam* to appease, to come to peace, come to rest. And she is that state of appeasement, of rest, of repose. And she is beyond or free from time and any other conditioning. And she is the abode of consciousness of everybody, whether with thought or without thought. So it's not only in a state of *nirvikalpa*, even in the state of *savikalpa* um, it is she who is present. 

*m viśrāntiḥ parā mātā viśrāntiḥ parā mātā kālopātivivarjitā kālopātivivarjitā savikalpavikalpanāṁ savikalpavikalpanāṁ sarvāsaṁ sarvāsaṁ saṁvidālayā saṁvidālayā* 

Maybe first only those who already know it and then the others can join in the next time. 

*viśrāntiḥ parā mātā viśrāntiḥ parā mātā kālopātivivarjitā kālopātivivarjitā savikalpavikalpanāṁ savikalpavikalpanāṁ sarvāsaṁ sarvāsaṁ saṁvidālayā saṁvidālayā* 

So you keep it in the back of your mind and then we'll revive it occasionally. 

I I don't need to repeat or to say what I maybe have not yet said, that here our guru is the text. Our guru is in a way Vasugupta. So to listen carefully first to the words of the guru and then, of course, we have to connect it to our own experience and so on. That's also very important. But um, to follow the logic of the text, first of all, and then establish the connection. 

Now what is also important, uh, especially for those who have, and most of us are done, who has not studied *Vijñānabhairava*, maybe ask… I think they are absolutely minority. So, for those who have done it, of course, for those who have not done it even more: the connection between *Spanda Kārikā* and uh, *Vijñānabhairava* is very essential because they are totally interrelated and uh, complementing, uh, each other. Now, what we have done in the last morning session… There was this expression again… I'm I can close this? No, not this one. Here. It's just in the draft, you know? 

We had um, a few verses were connected with what we have done. Uh, we had this expression: *ādharāt* — with great respect, with great care and attention. And, uh, this is actually the definition of the spiritual worship in *Vijñānabhairava*. If you remember that *Vijñānabhairava*… all the acts of ritual worship, they are reinterpreted in the spiritual way. And the first and most common act of course in all Hindu or Indian ritual is *pūjā*. Now how it defines *pūjā* is um: *pūjanāma na puṣpādyaiḥ yamati kriyate 'dṛṣṭā nirvikalpe parāvyo- mni sapūjā hi yādarātlayā*. It's just to remind you. But I think consciousness is very brief about the different states of you know, happiness and unhappiness, and analyzing in one verse what is that underlying um, thread connecting these states. I'm happy, unhappy, and so on. And that can be, before going to the uh ultimate uh, Shankar consciousness, that can be the *puriāṣṭaka*. *Puriāṣṭaka* means that psychic body which is consists of the senses and the mind and the intellect and the ego sense. But in the next verse, he already denies when he says: "No, I am neither that is neither suffering nor happiness. There is no object or no subject and not even the state of confusion." Verse 5. Now, in the morning, we have done six and seven, which analyzes the, uh, activities of the senses and the two levels of the senses — *karaṇa*. *Karaṇa* means, uh, literally the instruments, because the senses are the our instruments. The organs… Sense organs which are as such… Can you close the door? Thank you. The organs are lifeless in themselves unless they become, uh, animated by the energy, the energies of each sense organ. And they are called *karaṇeśvarīs*. Now this is not an a new invention of the Tantras, because already in the Upaniṣads, we have the idea of the *indriya* uh, *indriya-devatāḥ*, that the sense organs are, uh, divine powers. So it's already from, actually from *Atharva Veda*, Upaniṣads um, this uh, idea is there. So it is not um only in Tantra. Of course, this idea is used in a different way and um in a different practice.

So and that again, coming back to the *Vijñāna Bhairava*, there are so many uh *karaṇas* in the *Vijñāna Bhairava* which um, make use of sense experience in order to enter into that um, energy which is at the bottom, at behind uh, the sense experience. And then we have that beautiful verse uh, about the peacock feathers uh, which is a classical verse on the the um the senses. Although it is, it's very symbolical um, like the the *maṇḍalas*, the wonderful, colorful — *Maṇḍala* means circles, concentric circles of the peacock's feathers. And in the same way, the senses are uh, they are compared to that. And in the center, there is a dark uh, uh, spot. And in the central circle is dark, and that is *śūnya*. That is void. So that every sense experience ultimately terminates in the in the void. So it is very symbolic and um, and therefore, it is quoted so frequently because it's not so, uh, not so easy to understand, but it it is very easy to enter into meditation by using this verse. That is, I think, was verse number, what is it? Sixty-five or something? The the… uh, yeah, 32. 32: "By meditating on the five voids of the senses, which are like the various colors of the peacock's feathers, the *yogī* enters the heart of the absolute void." That's a beautiful meditation. 

So here we are. We uh, stopped at the uh, point of the *karaṇeśvarīs* and um the important expression which comes here at the end uh, of verse seven: *svatantra-tā yataḥ svatantra-tātasya sarvatra-iyama-kṛtrima*. That um un-artificial — means absolutely spontaneous. This, the translation 'spontaneous' is very correct also for *akṛtrima*. Spontaneously. It's not made. It's not created. That totally free, uh, spontaneous, or um, freedom prevails everywhere. So here there is a transformation of the sense experience into that divine freedom. And not going into the… Well, the commentary is is very long, but I'm just selecting from the commentary because I would like this afternoon, if we, uh, lucky to reach at least may verse 10. Now interestingly, uh, Kṣemarāja immediately connects this uh these two verses with one *Śiva Sūtra*, which is *udyama-bhairava*. Now, *udyama-bhairava* is um, one of the most fantastic, uh, *Sutras* of the *Śiva Sutras*. And as we talked about the brevity of the *Sutras*, I mean the the it cannot be surpassed. *Udyama-bhairava*… It's in a way, it's a definition of *bhairava*, you know, but you can of course um, take it from both sides. Who is *bhairava*? What is *bhairava*? *Bhairava* is *udyama*. And *udyama* is such a fantastic word, you know, that… I see this prefix "ut" always means something elevating, rising, pushing up, as, uh, Silburn says, *élan*. Uprising — *élan*. And "yam" uh, means also, uh, controlling. And um, so these two things, uh, there is an effort also, but uh it's not not a willful effort. It is a push. It's a kind of inner push uh which to rise up. So *bhairava* is that inner push for rising up. Swami ji uh used to say: "You have to be elevated." So that is again also that elevation. That elevation is *bhairava*.

*Shambhavopaya*? It is uh *Shambhavopaya*. *Shabdatan*? *Shambhavopaya*? *Shambhava*? *Shambhavopaya*?

Yes, yes. It is the highest, uh, uh, the highest level.

Highest means… Yes. Then he quotes um, uh, in the commentary to the *Śiva Sūtra* 1.5. He quotes the *Mālinīvijayottara Tantra*: "The penetration, chief inescapable state of trance which absorbs your individual being, is called *śāmbhava-samāveśa*." What is it? "Because of the elevating infusion of power from the master, this *śāmbhava-samāveśa* is experienced by one who is capable of keeping away all thoughts and impressions." So nothing less than that. Our masters explain this verse in this way: when you are capable, then your master will uplift you. If you are not capable, he will not be successful in carrying you there. This means you must be capable of absorbing this kind of awareness. And then he quotes *Svacchanda Tantra*: "O Pārvatī, all mantras are successful for the one who contemplates on his own self as one with *bhairava*, because he's always one with that awareness of consciousness, etcetera." Here, this explained how, after instantaneously taking hold of supreme consciousness, one attains establishment in *bhairava*, by which establishment he destroys the threefold bondage of ignorance. So this instant in *udyama* has this implication of this, uh, suddenness also. That sudden elevation. It's not a gradual process. It's not *krama*. It is *akrama*. So this was the commentary on the, uh, *Śiva Sutra*. So he connects, uh, this verse, uh, 67. 

That principle which has been finally ascertained with the exposition of *udyama-bhairava* given in *Śiva Sūtra* should be examined with great care and reverence. That principle should be examined as the cessation of all differences. And so on and so on. The innate freedom in the form of *spanda* known to everyone through self-experience, being one's own essential nature, identical with *Śiva*, is manifest everywhere, both with reference to the sentient and the insentient. And he goes on to the group of senses.

Now we come, for those who have the book, um, page 54, last para, and 55. Uh, did we already do… Let the sense faculties full of delight be attached to their respective objects, but may there not *vicitya tattvam viṣayīkartum kṣamas tasya avikalpyatvāt*, because it is unthinkable and not thought beyond the range of thought. Even then, when calming down his desire which is in pursuit of objects of pleasure, by at first allowing it to have its enjoyment, he contacts the *Spanda* principle which is the power of the inner self and which endows his senses with consciousness. Then he becomes equal to that *Spanda* principle. That is, by being immersed in that reality, he acquires freedom everywhere. Since such is the case, that principle should be examined. This is the sense. The expression — by the touch of the power of the self — has been used because the quality of touch is predominant in the stage of *Śakti*. So that is true um… 

Now here, the whole, uh, actually this is maybe the crucial point of the whole of Tantric spirituality: how the sense experience is transformed into, uh, a divine or spiritual experience. And this is the whole whole turning point. The first question is, who is the… who is the subject who has the will, the *icchā*? Whose will is it? As long as it is our individual, uh, limited will — we have talked about *kriyāśakti* and so on — we cannot touch that power. And we get lost in the externals. We get lost. But only when we are touched by that power, and that it is no longer our will. It is something acting through us, and and then we become equal to that, by the touch of the of that power. So, as we have seen in Utpaladeva, that first, he lets his senses go out. But at the same time, he says: "But not for an instant be separated from the state of your nonduality." So that is why unless you are merged in that, uh, you you cannot, uh, experience that, or you will be gone. You will be gone. And that's why I mean even, uh, realistically speaking, some of the people who are pretending to be Tantrics and to think that they can let their senses go… But it's a total illusion. Because as, uh, I mean it can lead to an illusion unless there is this total, uh, nonduality, and this total immersion and, uh, as he says in Sanskrit, *ātma-paśamāyat samāveśāt samāveśāt*. That's why *samāveśa* is is our central uh, you know, that total immersion, total absorption. 

Yes. Is there a contradiction here in uh, what you just said, uh, uh, "let my senses see everything," but uh, "be immersed in nonduality," uh, the part of the commentary said that uh, "my will can take me thus far, then it has to be the touch of divine to take me the further distance away." So how do you reconcile these two? I mean, on one side, I'm supposed to use my senses, but yet remain immersed in the divine. On the other side, the, uh, I think the part of commentary says that I cannot touch the divine unless and until divine touches me. So how do you reconcile these two?

What you say, that's a matter of experience. Uh, once you have that experience, you will know that that your sense exper-… your senses will become intensified. It's not that you don't, uh, experience you. And that's the whole of *Vijnāna Bhairava* says that the the sense experience becomes intensified if you are immersed in that uh consciousness which is actually the driving that, uh, sense experience. And because it's very easy to understand, even logically, because our limited ego, it it can only have a limited uh enjoyment even… See how, uh, if we think of the whole beauty of the universe, how can we enjoy it? Because we are so limited by all this *pañca-kośas*, you know, the space, time, and uh and so on and so on. And, uh, it is only when you are entering into that stream of consciousness which is enlivening the whole uh sense experience, and then you are not separated. And that flow goes out, and it goes in. It is a it is a, uh, that's what he said before: "Let it go out, and let it come back" — *saṃhāra*. And that's the the the other sense of *saṃhāra*, you know, *sṛṣṭi-sthiti-saṃhāra*. Creation means going out. And then let it enjoy it for some time. And then *saṃhāra*, and then withdrawing inside again. And this is, uh, it's such a, uh, absolutely overwhelming, uh, which you can never experience in the level of your individual consciousness. That's why the mystics have the greatest… are also the greatest poets because they can experience, uh, in a much wider and deeper sense, even the beauty, uh, of the world. Yes?

Um, but before someone can experience that nondual state, and should we abstain from the senses until one perfects that and then can enjoy the sentences… senses through its ultimate…

That's what he's is not saying here. He's not at all saying here. But the only question is, in what, uh, state of mind… not mind, state of consciousness you are enjoying the senses. So and that is a question of uh *viveka*, you know. You have to discriminate. And that's why I say some of these Tantric gurus, you know, who who let themselves go… they think, "Well, they are already beyond, and they are already in that state." But then it may also cause a fall if, uh, if you are not uh firmly established in that nonduality. But uh, so either your guru has to tell you to be careful or to go ahead or to go whatever, or you have to feel it yourself: where is the limit? But, uh, in the, uh, spirituality of *Vijnāna Bhairava* and the whole cool… That's what the great scholar Sanderson calls "the prescription of intensity." It's not… Nothing else is prescribed, only intensity. So you you don't say that, "I don't look outside, it's just distracting you." No, you look with greater intensity. And the greater the intensity, you lose yourself. Yeah. And then this will happen by itself. And this is what happens in in in aesthetic experience. That's why these authors are so fond of uh aesthetic experience because it's it's an experience which draws you out of your individual self and merges you into that beauty. And then from that beauty, again, one step further to the divine. This is the the whole crucial point of that whole uh Tantric uh nondualistic Tantric spirituality. So any of the verses of uh *Śiva Sutra Vimala*, as I said, can be, uh, analyzed in this light. And uh, and many verses of the *Vijnāna Bhairava* can be practiced in that way. Where even, I mean there are two verses on, uh, sexuality, and it's absolutely, uh, the same, uh, same line. But the condition is always in what state of consciousness you are practicing. Can we do one more? Yes, yeah.

Uh, now this is one of the… I won't say only *my* favorite, but one of the, uh, favorite of the whole tradition, because, uh, some half verses, you know, they are quoted again and again and again and again, because they are so precise. So while introducing… Do you need some light?

No.

No, it's a little dark, huh?

Introducing verse nine um, Kṣemarāja says a question arises here. Why does this… of activity… All this creates what is called *kṣobha*. *Kṣobha* is a very important term actually in this uh the the tradition. *Kṣobha*, both negative and positive. Like everything here is negative and positive. It's nothing is purely negative. *Kṣobha* means um agitation, you know. So mostly, why people go to the psychotherapists and so on, because they are so disturbed. There's disturbance and um, restlessness, agitation. This is perturbation — that is *kṣobha*. And that *kṣobha* is created… is one's own creation, by one's own impurity, and by one's own attachment to activity. So it's a whole, uh, psychological content here. But what happens, the moment that *kṣobha* comes to a halt, uh, gets dissolved: *yadā kṣobhaḥ pralīyate tadāsya param padaṁ*. The moment that agitation ends, you enter into supreme state. You don't have to go to so many stages and so many, uh, practices, and, uh, *āsana*, *prāṇāyāma*, this, that. But, and that very moment, you enter in the supreme state. This is the one of the most crucial sentences and in the whole, uh, tradition, it's again and again quoted: *yadā kṣobhaḥ pralīyate tadāsya parama padaṁ*. And again that *parama padaṁ*, that supreme state, it is not defined. It's not said that you become one with *Śiva* or anything — nothing. It's just *the supreme state*. And that openness, uh, of expression is very often we find it in the *Vīrarśaiva* also. Just what remains is the reality. Nothing remains but the reality. And here, *parama padaṁ*. So this is such a central expression. Then of course, you will ask, "Why, uh, how does it come, this that this agitation ceases?" and so on. But it's… it can be instantaneous. Can be through anything that… What Vīrabhadra give so many examples, you know, you you are sneezing, and suddenly the *kṣobha* disappears, or you, um, are standing at the, uh, at the edge of an abyss or… and you look down, and just that agitation disappears. So many occasions are there. So many possibilities.

This is compatible with what… I mean, since you quoted the *Mahābhārata* in the morning…

It says, "Do not be attached to action," whereas *Bhagavad Gita* says, "You got to do your actions."

I didn't quote that. Where… who quoted?

In the morning, you referred to the *Mahābhārata*. 

There are only verse from the *Mahābhārata* which I ever quoted here was: *yasmin sarvaṁ yatas sarvaṁ yas ya sarvaṁ tasya yoṣyaḥ*. That is nothing to do with karma.

I didn't quote it. But these are all different levels, you see, that no level is, uh, negative. But here we are a kind of jumping, you know. We are jumping from that level of the um, agitation, to the supreme state. And and this is the extraordinary thing of that, uh, spirituality, that you are not required to go through all this, you know, karma, "Oh, I have such bad karmas. I must be working very hard," and and uh and go through so many analysis and this and that. No, it can happen in a moment. And this um this is… this spirituality that maybe other spirituals, which have their own value… Excuse me.

Uh, so karma is not mentioned at all in Kashmir Śaivism. I just noticed now that they, uh, this… no purification of your karma. That's…

You see, uh, I think you have already listened to some of my teachings. And, uh, it's not *my* teachings, it's Kashmir Śaivism, that there are three *malas*. So if you're speaking *nija aśuddhi* — from where this *aśuddhi* comes? This *aśuddhi* comes from three causes. One is karma, one is *māyā*, and one is *āṇava*. So they… and the most difficult, the the impurity which is most difficult to overcome is *āṇava*. Karma is okay. You can work on your karma. *Māyā* is not so easy, but *āṇava* is the most difficult, um, impurity to overcome. Because *āṇava* is that impurity of individuality, that you are so much identified with your own individual limitation. And, uh, that individual limitation which makes you feel imperfect. That you're always feeling imperfect, and you always want to to fill that imperfection by, you know, by consumerism, by this, that… so many things. That is *āṇava* — *āṇavamala*. So that is the more difficult, um, impurity to be overcome. And we, that is very subtle, very subtle, because we are so, uh, until we are completely, you know, emptied, we are so much identified with our individuality. And with this sense of, uh, incompleteness. That's mostly defined. *Āṇavamala* is…

Is that identity with the body?

Yeah, that's it. Yeah. Yeah. Body and mind both.

Body and mind both?

Individual's body and mind, what he is thinking. Yeah, yeah, that's all part of… it's all um…

Can we say that the individual personality, we are so much bothered to perfect it, which *cannot* be perfect?

Yeah, yeah. And so we are all the time…

Yeah, we are all the time busy, uh, busy feeling a gap which can never be filled. 

So now let us come to that um commentary… This this so small print, it's very difficult to read this Sanskrit, I mean… And he of course comes… he speaks what you say about the *malas*, the limitations. What causes that impurity? "The *āṇavamala* is the first *aśuddhi*. This occurs when *icchā śakti* — willpower — becomes limited owing to non-contemplation of its essential nature." And so on and so on.

*Jñāna śakti*?

Yeah. Thank you, thank you.

Um, "being polluted by the five *kañcukas* or coverings of *māyā*, ere arisen from that gradually acquires limitations." So this is all the analysis of the *aśuddhi*, of the impurity. "And *kriyā śakti*, the power of of five practices… The five powers of Śiva… um, level by level… um, it's another… but *icchā*, *jñāna*, *kriyā*, of which become limited in the case of the individual. *Kriyā śakti* gets limited gradually in the sphere of difference, when omnipotence is reduced to limited activity and so on, till at last at the formation of the organs of action, the empirical individual gets limited to the utmost extent. He thus performs good and, uh, bad acts and this is the *karma mala*." So that's where your karma comes. But um as in this system, you know, the uh, *malas* are nothing substantial. Like in *Śaiva Siddhānta*, *malas* are substantial. They're so substantial that you need a lot of ritual initiation, this and that, to get rid of them. And they say that it's like when you have a cataract in the eye, which I do have, you cannot get rid of it unless it is operated. And that operation is done by, uh, ritual. But in uh in the non-dual system, that these *malas* are not considered to be substantial. They are superficial um… They are to be taken seriously, but they can be overcome even without ritual, even by an act of grace, by an act of knowledge, an act of, uh, insight, uh, and so on. So uh there are other ways of overcoming these *malas*. "Thus by such impurity, the individual becomes devoid of omniscience and omnipotence." And then when he… what I said, is a chapter of *Īśvara Pratyabhijñā*, ah, page 62, in the middle. "Being thus incapacitated, he is attached to all kinds of actions — worldly and those prescribed." In *Āṇavopāya*, you can do a a lot of uh spiritual practices are described to precisely to get out of that limitation, out of that uh fragmentation that this collection… I think… Yeah. At the end of… when he summarizes the whole meaning of that verse, which is so uh central, that we are not proceeding further today. And, uh, at the end he summarizes again by a verse from the *Gaṇakārikā*, which is 138: "Oh dear one, when the mind, the individual consciousness, the vital energy, and the limited self — these four have disappeared — then the nature of *kaivalya* appears." So it's the same thing expressed in a different, uh, way. It doesn't say *kṣobha*, but *kṣobha* consists of mental agitation and, uh, limited consciousness, and, um, vital energy. Limited self. Here, doesn't say *Āṇava*, but it is the same. "When these four have disappeared, then the nature of *kaivalya* appears." So it's the same: that suddenness. And he doesn't say here *how* they will disappear, or in what instance it happens. It can happen any moment, it can happen in any situation, and that's what the *Gaṇakārikā* says. Uh, different situations where suddenly, you know, your mental, uh, disturbances suddenly disappear, suddenly dissolves. So it's not always just through a process of, um, liberating your mind from thoughts and this and that, that… but it is sudden. So in this verse, and in the *Gaṇakārikā*, it is something happening suddenly. I think we stop here, and um… This is very crucial. And tomorrow we come to… So before we… yeah, switch it off. Yeah, switch it off. 
