Good morning!

We start with the last Maṅgala, which we have learned yesterday, in praise of the word of the master Āgāthasaṃśayambhūti. And please help me voice those who know:

> Āgāthasaṃśayambhūti samutāranatariṃ vande vicitrātapadaṃ cittāntaṃ gurupādātim
>
> Āgāthasaṃśayambhūti samutāranatariṃ vande vicitrātapadaṃ cittāntaṃ gurupādātim

In the course of this week we will learn it perfectly. 

First, what does "a retreat" mean? I came to (a) very simple formula, but we may correct the simplicity of it. (There are) three parts: one is our own sincerity, our own search, our own desire to go deeper into our spiritual life, and (the) desire to get more transparency, more clarity in our daily life. The second (part) is the text and the teaching. And um, these texts, all of these texts, I must say, they are not for our information. We are so much flooded by information technology and everything, we can find (it) in the internet and whatnot, whatnot, whatnot. But uh, these texts are *transformative* and not informative. So, and it's my own experience, I think everybody who has dealt with these texts, you may open it somewhere and you find the answer to your question, or you you are pushed to go deeper into your uh your view of uh the world, (of) reality and so on. So, these texts are to be taken as *transformative*. And I must say, practically all the texts of the tradition, of course there are some which are highly technical, philosophical. If you read the *pratibhijña*, the *pratibhijñāvivr̥ti*, or the *īśvarapratybhijñāvimarśinīvimarsinī* of Abhinavagupta, but even there you find sentences, you know, which suddenly eject you into another level of consciousness. Even if you don't understand the whole argument, what is going on, but, but he always connects it with the the the original stream of consciousness. That is the second (part). 

So, what is this third part of this retreat? I would call it the *unexpected*. And in our in our tradition we call it *grace*. But what does "grace" mean? "Grace" means, as Abhinavagupta himself (says), that which comes unexpected, undeserved, and suddenly it overcomes you, and you don't know from where it has come. And uh you have been sitting in meditation for so many hours and still it has not happened. And then suddenly, in some other situation, it happens. So, it, I would call it the *unexpected*. And uh, we even have (a) very beautiful um expression by Kṣemarāja himself, when he introduces the first śloka of our text, and that relates very much to the *Vijñanabhairava*, which we have done last year. He has an expression there, he says:

> vibhavāvasthā eva vibhavāvasthā eva

Where is that one page which has been photocopied for everybody, because it contains the first uh śloka? 

> vibhavāvasthā eva kathcit. That itara akalabhr̥tiśchāyārūpā udyogasya viṣayā iti āveditam.

> There are certain states of the individual in practical life which, by bringing about the total cessation of all other states than that, provide the occasion for the realization of *spanda*.

So, *vibhavāvasthā eva*, even in the condition of your normal uh awareness, in your ordinary activity of life. And, and this is the secret of this whole spirituality, you know. You don't have to sit for 12 months in Deer Park meditating, but you can be in your office, or in your job, or in anything, and it just happens. And so, this is what I would call the third part of this retreat, where even the first and the second, they are not causal. You see, we always think of cause and effect. So that, because I'm very sincere, because I'm studying the text very thoroughly, it doesn't mean that you get it. You get it from somewhere else. And this is very much in the tradition, because uh Utpaladeva, the great master of recognition, he starts his very first verse of his doctrine of recognition, *pratibhijña* uh *īśvarapratybhijñākārikā*, by saying:

> kathaṃcid āsādya maiśvarya sadāsanam kathaṃcit.

> Somehow, it happened to me that I attained the state of servanthood of the Lord. Somehow…

He has no other expression. He can't say how it happened. *kathaṃcit*. And it's such a wonderful understatement um that is, no, he can say, "Well, by grace of my master," or by whatever he can. But no, *kathaṃcit*, somehow. So, this is that third element, which is not in our control, uh which is not the causal uh cause and effect matter, but it just happens. And uh, so that's what one cannot even hope for it, you know, because it is so unexpected that even hoping for it is wrong. Because and the the the philosophical reason in Kashmir Shaivism is precisely that this realization (and I'm not talking of *spanda*, but it's all *spanda*) uh this realization is not to be objectified. You cannot, now we say, "Oh, yes, we are studying *spanda*." So, I'm writing the definition of *spanda* on the whiteboard. But you cannot objectify it. It is the *subject*. It's a revelation of the *subject*. And that's why the very first chapter of the uh *spandakārikā*, according to Kṣemarāja (of course there are different classifications of chapters), is called *svātmaspanda*, (which) means the the vibration of one's own essential nature. And *svātman* cannot be objectified. And Abhinavagupta has a beautiful, um he always gives very practical, also psychological, examples. He says:

> We human beings, we don't like to be treated like objects. 

And it's (a) very modern psychological approach, I would say. We don't want to be objectified, reified. So, what about the Lord? What about the ultimate reality? You cannot objectify it. You cannot uh say, "This is it," you know? And this is (a) very ancient Upaniṣadic idea, that there is no um I mean that no, it's not the *known*, but the *knower*, and so on. It comes back in Krishna Murti, and so on: freedom from the *known*. So, all this(e) great masters have aimed at the same reality. So, it is not something which we can hold in our hand, or which we can grasp, or which we can uh think, "We have got it." And uh, and this, yes, yesterday (and I'm very sorry because of my condition of health, I'm not only physically weak but mentally also, so sometimes, if I forget something, please remind me), yesterday I quoted one um verse of the *Shiva Sutras* regarding this uh different *ācāras*, where there is *sarvācāra*, (which) means Shiva; he is praised as the one who belongs to every tradition, to every uh spiritual practice. And here Kṣemarāja has such (a) beautiful commentary, which brings us to our topic again from the backside. How does he explain *sarvācāra*? 

> *Nitya parispandaḥ iśvaraḥ.*

> He belongs to all traditions because they are his own complete vibration of consciousness. 

Every tradition is *parispanda*, *nitya parispanda*, his own vibration of consciousness. It's a tremendously universal idea of what every spiritual tradition is: *nitya parispanda*, his own vibration of consciousness. And then, of course, the last stage, which is *nirācāra*, he says:

> …because he transcends all traditions and all rules…

because every tradition has its own set of rules, and prescriptions, and and so on. So, he is beyond all that. But this *sarvācāra* definition is very significant. 

And now I'm, again, apologize, dressing to the text, because I will continue at the end and then we come to the beginning. And we will take up the very last verse, which is not contained in all um commentaries. But Kṣemarāja, being at least in our tradition the most um authentic uh commentary, he has it and he also comments on it very importantly. So, those who have the book, it is on page 174. And why I'm taking up the last verse (of course we'll repeat it at the end) um because it shows us in what spirit we have to uh study this text.

> Labdhvā apy alāpyam etat jñānathanaṃ hr̥tkuhāntargata nihite vasuguptavat śivāya hi bhavatī sada sarvalokasya

And there, uh I think there is, in this, something has been repeated. I'm reading the revised translation.

> As on the attainment of this treasure of knowledge which is difficult of attainment, and its being well preserved in the cave of the heart, as it has been for the good of Vasugupta, so also it would always be for the good of all.

Now, what is uh contained here is oneness.

> *Labdhvā api alāpyam…*

Although it has been attained, it has been realized, and still it remains unattainable. I mean, the translation softens that contrast somehow. But actually, *labdhvā api a- alāpyam*. Although it has been attained, it remains unattainable. And I think it's (a) very powerful statement, that whatever you attain, whatever you experience, you always remain with that *alāpyam*: it is unattainable. The, the perfect perfection of the full realization, full awakening, full enlightenment, it still remains *alāpyam*. *Labdhvā apy alāpyam*. And this uh, uh treasure of knowledge, *jñānathana*. And that is also (a) play with the name of Vasugupta, because he's the hidden treasure. And treasure, of course, not of material things, but of uh knowledge, of spiritual things. And so, that object which has been attained is the treasure of knowledge. But this treasure, like any physical treasure in ancient times used to be hidden in some underground cave or something, uh but the spiritual treasure has to be hidden in the cave of the heart: *hr̥tkuhāntargata nihite*. That's to be protected and hidden in the cave of the heart. And that's (a) very Upaniṣadic um image, the cave of the heart, and it always means that secret place where you're completely alone. You don't go to the cave, of course, Abhinavagupta, in the end, the tradition says that he went to the cave with (a) thousand disciples uh and to end his life, but this is a legend which um is very beautiful, but it is definitely not true uh historically. Yeah. But otherwise the cave is that place where you go alone, you are in your own deepest recess of your heart, and there you treasure that knowledge. And uh this is precisely what we have to do here. 

And, yeah, "But now, just as it has been for the good…" Yeah, *śiva* is not the name of the God, but (an) adjective for good, for the good. *Śiva* means good, goodness. 

> …so as it has been for the good of Vasugupta, (which) means for his own liberation, so it should always be for the whole world, for everybody. 

And that's, again, that uh aspect of compassion of the revelation. (A) text is always meant for (the) liberation of others. Otherwise, he could sit in his cave and be happy and uh not compose any any text to teach it and so on. So, that *śivāya sadā bhavadbhiḥ sarvalokasya*, for all the people. And um, Śivārāja says about this hidden in the cave:

> *hṛtkuhāntargatā nihitaṃ yatnāt ātmīyatātkop- kopayata tṛtapat- patipatyāca svātmīkṛta* 

And um, this beautiful expression, uh "to keep it, preserve it in the heart", uh explains this *svātmīkṛta*. And this is exactly what we have to do: make it our own, (which) means make it our own. In Hindi you say *apnānā*, but *apnānā* is a little bit too weak um in comparison to this Sanskrit *svātmīkṛta*, *svātmīkaraṇa*, integrated into your own self, into your own being, so that treasure of knowledge, don't keep it somewhere on the shelf, but integrated into your own being. And there, keep it secret, keep it… And that, I must say, you see, in some of these modern spiritual circles, um especially in the West (and that wave has come back to India also), that, is too much of, sometimes, talking about spiritual experience. See, whatever spiritual experience you have to keep it hidden in the heart. And uh, this um you know, it, you lose that power which you have experienced if you take it out of that hiddenness. And if you make it your own, *svātmīkaraṇa*, then it will transform your life, and it will show itself. You don't have to declare it, that "I am a self-realized person," "I am a" whatnot, whatnot. Now we find this, you know, there, there are posters in Tiruvannamalai that uh, this, uh, uh, you know, this…  So, this is not to be advertised. And in the whole of Indian tradition, realization, or enlightened men has been self, uh, advertising men. Whoever has got that experience, the others could recognize. It's in the tradition. I mean, if the same thing what happened to Ramana Maharshi would have happened to him in Europe, of course, they would have put him in a psychiatric ward. But, um in India it is (a) part of the traditions. You don't have to declare that um "I am realized," and "I have had this great experience," and so on. So, this hiding in the cave of the heart and making it one's own, and this is really something. If I'm thinking of my master, Swami Lakshman Joo, you know how this(e) text(s) were in the in the veins of his blood and in the every fiber of his being, you know, when he was uttering these verses. So, it, it came from every pore of his uh of his body, and, and then it has (a) completely different power than uh than uh if you are separate from that knowledge, the treasure of knowledge. 

So, now we come finally to the beginning. And uh all the time you must be thinking, "I should at least give you a definition of what is *spanda*." But, um you know, when you approach (a) holy place, or like a holy mountain like Kailash, you don't climb on the top, but you make a circumambulation. So, we go around that *spanda*, and the text itself is the path on which we are going to discover what is that *spanda*, and not only a definition but an experience. Now, before we recite this (of course Śivārāja has (a) very beautiful introductory part (the aim of the whole text, and you will see that uh here it comes very close to Buddhism also): there are three stages of enlightenment, or we (should) rather call it awakening: *aprabuddha*, *prabuddha*, and *suprabuddha*. We'll come to that, I only I mention it now, because the aim of the text is to reach that state of, at least, *prabuddha*, if not *suprabuddha*. From a state of *aprabuddha*, well, that's a normal uh state of uh consciousness which we are quite used to. But the aim of the entire text is that. And that terminology is used throughout: *prabuddha*, *suprabuddha*. Now, what's the difference? The text will tell us. And just only one sentence from the introduction by Śivārāja. He says that Vasugupta (of course he, again and again, refers to that experience of the discovery of the *Śivasūtras*) um then he says:

> …by demonstrating the agreement of revelation, experience, and reasoning…

So, that is *āgama*, *anubhava*, *upapatti*.  *Anubhava*, yeah, in the book it's page three. 

> *āgama anubhava upapatti e- ekīkaraṇam.* 

So (it) means the unity. The text is the unity of *āgama* (which) means revelation, that which has come down by tradition, *anubhava* (which is) his own experience, and *upapatti* (which) means reasoning. And because in this whole tradition, you see, if you think that (the) spiritual tradition or mystical has excluded reason, it's just the opposite. It is much more (of a) greater clarity, uh than in a simple uh logic. But reasoning, um also called *yukti*, belongs to every one of these traditions. But the basis is *āgama* and *anubhava*. 

Now we come to the first verse. Now, like in…

It's not the *agreement*, it's the *unity*. Huh?

It's the *unity*. It's not the *agreement*. *Unity*, actually, yes, yeah. I think, here… Yesterday, I said something about *maṅgalaśloka*, that those verses which are always recited at the beginning of every teaching and of every text. And um I compare them sometimes to the entrance gates to a big temple, you know. You have to pass through these gates and then, through so many inner corridors, you reach the sanctuary. But they also have one function, apart from the function to remove obstacles and so on, but another function is to condense the entire text in one verse. And uh they contain, in essence, the entire text. And that is why Śivārāja has commented (on the) entire text just in one verse: *spanda- sandoha*. So, this was his first commentary (which) was just on the first verse, which we are now going to recite. And uh, this (is) more in the Kashmiri uh tone of reciting…  So, you have the page number five, yeah? Everyone has the photocopy, if you don't have the book.

> yasyo nimeṣanimīṣābhyāṃ jagatāṃ phalodayo tam śakticakravibhavaṃ prabhavaṃ śaṃkaraṃ stumaḥ 
>
> yasyo nimeṣanimīṣābhyāṃ jagatāṃ phalodayo tam śakticakravibhavaṃ prabhavaṃ śaṃkaraṃ stumaḥ 

Once more:

> yasyo nimeṣanimīṣābhyāṃ jagatāṃ phalodayo tam śakticakravibhavaṃ prabhavaṃ śaṃkaraṃ stumaḥ 
>
> yasyo nimeṣanimīṣābhyāṃ jagatāṃ phalodayo tam śakticakravibhavaṃ prabhavaṃ śaṃkaraṃ stumaḥ

So, (a) simple translation will not help us. But still, let us read it:

> We laud that Śaṃkara by whose mere opening and shutting of the eyelids (this is a translation of uh Jaidev Singh, and uh Marc's is different) there is the appearance and dissolution of (the) world, and who is the source of the glorious powers of the collective whole of the *śaktis* in various forms.

And Marc, Marc translates uh *unmeṣanimīṣa* in a different way:

> We praise that Śaṃkara who is the source of the power of the wheel of energies, by whose expansion (*unmeṣa*) and contraction (*nimeṣa*) the universe is absorbed and comes into being.

Now, before we go into an interpretation of this very uh complex verse, um I want to refer to some other text to see what is meant by *stuti*. You see, there, most of the *maṅgala* verses, um they are in praise of the deity or of the uh master, *guru*, and so on. Um so, what does it mean, "praising"? Because we are in a non-dualistic system. So, who is praising whom? But there is (a) beautiful uh beautiful sequence, you know. Praise is one stage, and one thing I must say about Kashmir Śaivism is that, see, every stage is respected in its own way. You may not have reached the highest uh unity consciousness, but you start from somewhere. You start from where you are. And there is (a) beautiful sequence of when you start from *stuti*, from praising. And it's by Abhinavagupta Nārāyaṇa in the *Stavacintāmaṇi*, verse 36. It starts with *stuti*, praise. Then the next stage is *smṛti*, (which) means uh *smṛti* means not memory, but it means uh commemorating, commemorating. When you're praising somebody, something, so it becomes a kind of memory, uh commemoration. And *smṛti*, of course, has (a) much deeper meaning also in Buddhist practice and so on. And even…

Huh? From which root? Which root? *Smṛti*? Uh *Stavacintāmaṇi*? No, no… *Smṛti* pro- uh *smṛti*, *smṛti* remembrance. 

Remembrance. The third stage is *dhyāna*, meditation. So, when you start with praising, then you come to uh remembering, then you come to meditation, *dhyāna*. And after *dhyāna* is *darśana*: vision, contemplation. After *darśana* is *sparśana*: touching. And touching means coming in direct contact. But still there is one last stage, and that is called *prāpti*: attainment. So, if you, even if you start with praising uh the Lord, but this praise has to lead you on to *smṛti*, to *dhyāna*, to *darśana*, to *sparśana*, to *prāpti*. So, this is (a) very beautiful uh explanation of why praise is uh the starting point for the whole process. So, it's not that you, you stop at just, "Here I am, the one who praises. He is the one who who is praised." But it's the beginning of (a) whole process of spiritual ascension, uh which leads to the total uh unity, total attainment, *prāpti*. So, if you want, I can repeat: *stuti*, *smṛti*, *dhyāna*, *darśana*, *sparśana*, *prāpti*. I can also write it afterwards. I just found this as some, a little additional uh information. 

Now, the first two words which are causing (a) problem in interpretation (are) *unmeṣa* and *nimeṣa*. And um, of course, literally they may also (mean) opening and closing of the eyelids. And um we know in many languages uh we speak of "a moment", even in Sanskrit *nimeṣa* is also (a) unit of very minor, the unit of time. Um, the moment is counted by the blinking of the eyelids. In German it is, uh in French also, and uh I don't know which other languages. 

*"Clignez"* and *"clignez"*, yeah. 

Um, so this is, it is an image which um, it's not taken too literally that there is the Lord Śaṅkara who opens and closes his eyes. It isn't, it is a *metaphor*. Um but (a) *metaphor* for the relativity, you know, that he just opens and closes his eyes and the world is created and is again destroyed. But so it's not so much theistic in that sense, you know, because it means also something like *kṣaṇika*. See, in, in one moment, uh it is uh brought about, and (the) next moment (is) it is uh dissolved. So, *unmeṣa* and *nimeṣa*, uh they're very momentaneous uh uh actions. But uh of course they mean something more than just this uh symbol of the opening and closing of the eyes. As Marc has translated it, um expansion and contraction. Now, expansion and contraction are two terms which are also used in another, um set of terms, that is uh *saṅkoca* and *vikāsa*. Um actually more literally *saṅkoca* and *vikāsa* than uh *unmeṣa*, *nimeṣa*. But *unmeṣa*, *nimeṣa* always has this implication of that opening and closing, whether you think of the eyelids, or of anything. So, that opening and closing, um of, of anything. And it's already a hint to *spanda*, because uh *spanda* means the palpitation, the, the, uh vibration, the pulsation. So, whether it's the heart, or it's the eyelids, or it is uh any, um, vibrant part of the body, which uh constantly palpitates, constantly is. Otherwise it's dead, if there is no such uh what *spanda* is also translated as "subtle movement", (the) most subtle, subtlest movement. And the subtlest movement is this opening, closing, opening, and closing, and then…

So, "we praise that Śaṅkara," and of course then he explains: "Śaṅkara, who is Śaṅkara?" *Śaṁ karoti iti śaṅkara*. The one who bestows peace, goodness, he is Śaṅkara. It's not so much the name, but the meaning. And Śrīmānmahārāja immediately says, "Who is Śaṅkara?" *Svasvabhāvaṁ śaṅkaraṁ stumaḥ.*, (which) means we praise that Śaṅkara who is our very own essential nature. *Svasvabhāvam śaṅkaraṁ stumaḥ*. Those who have the book, on page 6. And, uh, *śam*. So, I, I am in (a) great temptation of course to read the commentary, but then we will never finish. So, I have to be very selective, um otherwise we will, as Śrīmānmahārāja, we will stay with the very first verse until the end of that week. So, that would be… But do tell us the sentences that you read. 

Yeah, but this sentence, the first, when he says, "Who is Śaṅkara?" *Śaṁ karoti iti śaṅkaraḥ.* That's the definition in Sanskrit. 

What is *śam*? 

Goodness, uh peace. 

> *Upaśānta aśeṣopa- āta paramānanda advayam*.

That means, uh selec-, *"Prativigñāpanaṁ svarūpa anugrhaṁ karoti."* So, he who bestows the, the grace of recognition of one's own essential form, one's own essential nature. Which is peaceful, *upaśānta*, and, uh which destroys all suffering, *aśeṣopa- āta parama-* and who is the supreme bliss and non-duality, *advayam*. And the consciousness, *cidānanda* is part- is that, that it's, Śrīmānmahārāja has compounds, you know, which go over so many, so many lines. So, it's very difficult to um to dissolve his uh *samāsas*. Even Jayadev Singh, I remember when he was translating, he was always complaining about the long compounds of Śrīmānmahārāja. So, *śaṁ karoti* means he bestows peace, or ease, or goodness. Which consists in the grace of realizing one's, the self-recognition, *"prativigñāpanaṁ svarūpam"*, one's own true nature. And this true nature which consists in the consciousness of, um one's non-dual nature, uh which is peaceful, and which um destroys all suffering, and so on, and so on. And that, *svasvabhāvaṁ śaṅkaraṁ stumaḥ*. We praise that Śaṅkara who is our very own nature. So, immediately from that duality of "Here we are praising," and "Here (is) Śaṅkara", it immediately jumps into that non-duality. Because otherwise, who is Śaṅkara, if he is not our very own innermost nature? And of course, the non-dualistic, uh system in philosophy, they have sufficient arguments also to uh uh why you cannot even know Śaṅkara as another. It's just impossible. He is never another unless you uh experience him in your own *svarūpa*, *svasvabhāva*, and so on. So, you see, those who have the book, that there's (a) very long commentary, and uh we have to be very, it's very difficult to select, because it's so beautiful. 

Now, "he is praised as the source of the unfoldment of the cycle of energies." Now, *śakti cakra* is (a) very central term here. And in the *Spanda Sandoha*, which I'm also very much tempted to use, um he gives, Śrīmānmahārāja gives, 11 meanings of *śakti cakra*. Marc has translated uh *Spanda Sandoha*, but uh definitely we cannot, out of these 11 interpretations, I will select uh the most important ones. I mean, according to everyone (they are) important, but some are variations, uh of the same theme. 

What page is this on?

Uh, in uh Marc's book, 63. I think we'll have to start… Well, who is the Śaṅkara we have already um discussed, on the basis of the, um other commentary? 

Now, "the supreme Lord is both the great light of universal consciousness and the perfect medium of reflection." Now, this refers to another pair; you will see, um different pairs of concepts which are very typical of this system, like *saṅkoca*, *vikāsa*, and, uh, *unmeṣa*, *nimeṣa*, and *prakāśa*, *vimarśa*. Now, *prakāśa*, *vimarśa* are the basic, uh pair, (which) means the pure light of consciousness, and *vimarśa* is the self-reflective awareness, um like what we see normally in, in Vedānta. Not *we*, (I) mean the others, here. We see in Vedānta there is only *prakāśa*. But in Kashmir Shaivism there is *vimarśa*, (which) means the self-reflective power of awareness. So, these are all parallel terms which, uh precisely show that, um, the dynamism of consciousness, which is not only a light, uh I mean self-contained light, but that light is also reflected, and reflected not only in any um objective, uh sense, but we are also in that *vimarśa*. And, and the whole pair, bear of *prakāśa*, *vimarśa* is, of course, Śiva and Śakti. Because uh it is the, the dynamism of consciousness which is expressed in *vimarśa*. And *vimarśa* is the *śakti*. And, uh *vimarśa*, I must always say that we have sometimes very much uh made this concept very abstract. But when I, I was practicing in, uh, in the presence of my master, you know, he would simply say, when he'd say, "Meditate," he'd say, "Meditate," he'd say, "*Vimarśa karo*." And it's very much (a) practical, um you know, which means: "Enter into that state of uh self-reflection by which that light is uh realized through the reflection." So, it's, it's a practice, it's also, it's one way of, um, uh expressing that practice where you enter into that stream of consciousness. 

> So, the Supreme Lord is both the great light of universal consciousness and the perfect medium of reflection, also…is not, here we must, is not loose His one power of reflective awareness. It appears to be a subtle motion.

And now, this is one definition of *spanda*: *kiṃciccalatābhāsā*.

> …And so is proclaimed in the scriptures by means of countless names. And now you get some synonyms for *spanda*: *spanda*, vibration; radiance, *sphurattā*; wave, *ūrmi*; strength, *bala*; exertion, *udyoga* (although I don't like the translation "exertion", *udyoga* is, um, see, the, the prefix *ut* means always something elevating (*utyamo bhairava*, and the *Śivasūtras*, the, the greatest definition of *bhairava* is *udyamo bhairava*, (which) means that which makes you rise, which, which elevates you; so *udyoga* is also, although *yoga* is there, but *udyoga* is, (which) means that power of rising, power of elevating, uh related to *utyāma* also); the heart, *hṛdaya*; the essence, *sāra*; *mālinī*…

Now, *mālinī* is the name of (a), um mystical alphabet, because of all (the) mysticism of language (that) comes there and so on.

> …And the supreme power, *parā*. Also, this power is one. It is at once both expansion and contraction. Thus it is contraction (*nimeṣa*) in terms of the withdrawal of the previously emitted principles from *sadāśiva* to earth, and that relates to the, uh, Śaiva cosmology of the 36 *tattvas*. And is itself expansion (*unmeṣa*) in terms of forthcoming diversity, *pṛthak*. Again, the contracted (*nimeṣa*) state corresponding to the withdrawal of previously emitted diversity is itself the expansion (*unmeṣa*) of the awareness of the unity of consciousness. Conversely, the expanded state (*unmeṣa*) indicative of forthcoming diversity is itself the contraction of the awareness of the unity of consciousness. 

Now, this is (a) very dense statement, but very, absolutely central to the understanding of the entire, not the entire verse only, but the entire text. What happens in this movement, *unmeṣa*, *nimeṣa*? It is from the cosmic side: whenever the expansion of the universe happens, there is a contraction of consciousness. And whenever an expansion of consciousness takes place, the universe is contracted. Expansion of consciousness (means the) universe is contracted. So, this is actually a description of the spiritual experience, because when you enter into *samādhi*, or *samāveśa*, the world shrinks, the world is contracted, the world is, as if, absent. And when you, I mean, if you consider (it) on the cosmic scale (and not (with) our eyes (which) are very limited, but uh the, the divine eyes), when he opens it and then the whole universe is created. So, it is a uh, it is a *metaphor* in a way, but (a) *metaphor* which has very far-reaching consequences. Because this expansion (and) contraction is something which continuously goes on in our consciousness, but we are not aware of it. That's why what Somānanda says, "We must go reflect on that." I mean, what is going on all the time? Your awareness: if you get expanded, you know, you get so much distracted by (the) so beautiful uh outside world and so on, then your inner consciousness gets lost somehow. And if you get concentrated and you are uh in your own being, then this expansion gets uh contracted. So, this is actually the original, uh what is going on in *spanda*, is that> ... constant movement of contraction and expansion. 

And which is not only the divine (divine means here just Śaṅkara means the one who operates that), but he is not any deity outside, somewhere, that is our own *svātantrya* power, and our own, own um being and experience, where we can realize that movement in our own consciousness. And, and if, if, during this week, I mean we can get a glimpse of that experience, then it was worth spending so much time, and so much energy and so on. Because this is really the core of that *spanda* teaching. I think this whole passage I will read it again, because it's absolutely central. Um, of course I have, for those who are very good in Sanskrit, um, do you have the *Spanda Saṃdoha*? That, that's also translated, and I think in English also, is (a) translation… English?

Yeah, no I do, I, I will. But um I just, this one passage…  Yeah. Yeah. Um, I mean I don't know how many of you enjoy listening to Sanskrit, because, but, uh because this passage is so, so important…Yeah.

This is *Spanda Saṃdoha*. Okay, *Spanda Saṃdoha*, not um *Spandanirṇaya*. (That) is the commentary which is printed along with the text, uh with some editions. 

> *Yaśunmeṣeti īhāparameśvaraśśā mahāparāśātmāno vimalasyāpi ekāivāparamarśaśaktiḥ esī pāramaśaśaktiḥ kiṃciccalatābhāsarūpatayā spandā iti sphurattā iti ūrmī iti balam iti udyoga iti hṛdayam iti sāram iti mālinī iti parā iti ādi ananta saṃjñābhi…*

(Endless um synonyms are there.)

> …*āgameṣu utkīrṣyate sā caikāpi yugapatyeva unmeṣanimeṣamayī tathāhi sadāśivādi kṣitiparyantaśya tatpragrāmasya prā prāksṛṣṭasyā yaḥ saṃhārāpekṣayā nimeṣabhūsā eva sūkṣmā uh saṃsthiti sāmānya bhītā ā apekṣayā unmeṣadarśā prāk sṛṣṭa bhītā saṃhārā rūpācā yā nimeṣadarśā sā eva cit abhēda pratayā unmeṣabhūḥ…* 

Again the translation, because then only it will make sense.

> The Supreme Lord is both the great light of universal consciousness and the perfect medium of reflection. His one power of reflective awareness (*vimarśaśaktiḥ*)…

(Open eyes, of course, we see this (in) Buddha's uh statues with the half-open eyes, and in Japan I think they are always half-open. Um this is also very significant, you know, this in-between state. And, um, so to relate this *unmīlana* and *nimīlana*, with uh *unmeṣa* and *nimeṣa*, is also (a) very important uh connection with the experience of the yogi. Actually, in the commentary, and the *Spanda Sandoha* commentary, um Kṣemarāja, taking uh the starting point from this first verse, he comments on the whole text, uh which is very beautiful. I mean, one could do only, only this commentary, uh and in that we (would) read the whole text. But still we would like to read all the verses, that's why we are not, um going, uh, following that procedure. I got that (it) would be good, thank you.) 

> …And now um the interpretation of *śakti cakra*. Thank you. Even in this *Spanda Nirṇaya*, thank you, he gives um I think six interpretations of *śakti cakra*, but in the, uh, *Spanda Sandoha* he gives 11 interpretations. So, out of those we have to select. Now for those who have the book, um the interpretation of the *śakti cakra* uh starts on page 30 in the translation. Of course, one, uh way is, um the different groups, according to the Tantric traditions. There are certain groups of uh *śaktis*, um and, uh so these are, um some of these groups are just identified with this *śakti cakra*. But, um, what is very important here, maybe I will ask um Alexandra to explain something from the Krama tradition. Kṣemarāja was very much influenced by the Krama school, and the Krama school is (a) Tantric school which um has these um worships the 12 Kālis. But 12 Kālis are not any particular images, but they are phases of cognition, phases of, um phases of perception. So, this is the most, uh probably the most important interpretation of *śakti cakra*. So, first of all, one has to uh know that the entire, I mean the whole philosophy of the school, the entire manifestation, is, is a manifestation of *śakti*. So, there is nothing in the external world which is not a manifestation of *śakti*. And, um, *śakti cakra*, I mean *cakra* always means it's a totality, it's a, uh unity. Uh they are not diverse, but they are uh united in a totality. And this totality can be grouped according to the different Tantric traditions, but whatever is manifested, it is all a manifestation of *śakti*. And that's (the) basic uh philosophy of the school. So, Śiva does not manifest, it is *śakti* who is manifested. And, um, and that is why the *śakti cakra* is so uh important, uh in this first verse… 

Why is the iconography of *śakti* always feminine? Why is the iconography of *śakti* always feminine, and Śiva always male? Always what? The iconography: when you see *śakti*, she's in the feminine, it is in the feminine form, and Śiva is in the masculine form. Why this difference? 

That is, uh in the iconography… Well, here's actually not a question of iconography, of course. All this, you see the, all this(e) traditions have different levels. One level is the more popular level, which is that which has images, which has rituals, which has temples and so on. But here, it's a very abstract, in a very abstract way, or very philosophical, very spiritual. So, this *śakti cakra*, that is not something which you find represented. Also, there are, of course, forms of um uh *śakti* which are represented. If you take the *saptamātṛkā*, so they are represented in female form, of course. And, um but this is all because when you reach the level of human imagination, then you need some image. Ultimately, even if you try to overcome that, then you make it *ardhanārīśvara*. You see? Well, God is neither man or woman, and you make them half, half, and so on, but that's also human imagination. It's all anthropomorphic. But what we're talking here is not uh not an anthropomorphic image of this, by the *śakti* of Śaṅkara. That's why he says immediately, "Śaṅkara" means our very own essential nature. So, it's not a question of masculine, feminine, and so on, but, according to tradition, these different levels are not disconnected, but, um we are talking here of a very high level, where you don't have a, a *mūrti* of the *śakti cakra*, or something; it would be um totally, uh unfitting. So I mean the question of the gender of *śakti* itself… I mean you know the, the *Devī Māhātmya*, you see that all the feminine qualities are, she's praised, and all the feminine qualities which are grammatically feminine. And you know, in the Indian tradition, grammar is such (a) basic, um instrument of knowledge, so whatever is grammatically feminine, it is (a) *śakti*, because you need some basis to express something. So, like people say, "Well, in the West, the basis of um thought is mathematics." But in the Indian thought, it is grammar. It is Sanskrit grammar. And, and whatever Sanskrit grammar, it offers you a certain paradigm. So, you need some paradigm to express these realities which are beyond uh, uh human, uh imagination. So, the paradigm is grammar, and in grammar you have masculine, feminine. And then all the feminine qualities are called *devīs*, or called *śaktis*. So, uh this is the basis of our language. But, um otherwise, (there's) nothing to do here with uh iconography, or anything. *Śakti cakra* is (a) very abstract um, uh concept of the circle of energies, which is uh (a) circle of our own experience. And maybe Alexandra, would you like to say something about… Yeah, I can read maybe something about the Krama…  Yeah, I can read maybe something, because you can read something if you want. Yes, yes, you can have the microphone. Because yes, you've written the thesis on, uh the Krama, and uh and *śakti cakra* as it is explained by Kṣemarāja. Uh he relates this concept into, to the 12 Kālis. And it is the esoteric doctrine, uh which belongs originally to the Krama system. It is one of the, uh, systems of Kaśmīr Śaivism which is less elaborated. And Abhinavagupta, who was the teacher of Kṣemarāja, he, uh… Can you hear? Otherwise give her the microphone. I think this one. 

Uh, Abhinavagupta gives a description of the 12 Kālis in the chapter four of his *Tantrāloka*, in the chapter four of *Tantrāloka*… Life of the Masters, and he uh…

