Maybe this fathomless ocean of doubt has not yet been crossed because there are still many doubts in your minds. And so, we'll try to make the best use of this, our last day.

First, uh, maybe yesterday I said something only partially, uh, not complete, when I said Kṣemarāja has called this second, uh, no, third, uh, *niṣyanda vibhūti-spanda*. But *vibhūti* has more meanings than only city. *Vibhūti* doesn't mean only, uh, um, the yogic powers. It means also the glorious expansion of the Divine. The, the, uh, glorious expansion. 

Now, um, those of you who have done the *Pratyabhijñāhṛdayam* remember that Kṣemarāja spends more than half of his text by explaining the, um, state of bondage. So, why are we bound, um, in this *saṁsāra*, or whatever you may call it? So, he analyzes, uh, Kṣemarāja is a very systematic, uh, disciple of Abhinavagupta. He, uh, goes first into the negative analysis of what causes bondage, whereas this *Spanda-kārikā* immediately shoots up, you know, like some of this superfast planes, you know, they don't take much time, they immediately shooting up, uh, to great height. And then he has to come down and explain what's the difference between the ground level and the, uh, level of the *śuddha-buddha*. So, he comes rather late to the description of bondage, but it's always necessarily. Otherwise, um, you cannot make out the difference, and you cannot recognize. So, the state of enlightenment or awakening is, has to be seen over against the state of bondage.

Now, as I said, this is not the text of, uh, systematic philosophy. We are in the pre-philosophical stage of Kashmir Shaivism. *Śivasūtra*, *Spanda-kārikā*. Then comes Somānanda. Somānanda is the first philosopher who, in his *Śivadṛṣṭi*, he tries to systematize and based it on the, um, the vision of non-duality and so on. But still, he is, um, uh, combining many things. Uh, it's not only systematic philosophy. Um, so, this *Spanda-kārikā* is in a pre-philosophical stage of Kashmir Shaivism. And I never have the intention to make a systematic presentation of Kashmir Shaivism in these seminars. That's what I said yesterday. I prefer to follow the internal logic of the text. But, if that is not sufficient, then I have to give a very brief outline, um, in a schematic form, so that the questions which came up yesterday can be somehow at least localized. And they don't fit precisely. What? And that's not very illuminating. So, maybe we'll just see. Not very illuminating. So, did anybody see, is not very illuminating. To imitate the light. So, did anybody see, did in *Spanda-kārikā* where it is the circle plus the triangle?

Everything is pervaded by absolute consciousness: *Cit-chaitanya-sambhit*. And the internal structure of, because in this system you have not only an *Advaita*, all-embracing, but everything is in one block. But, there is a diversity, there is a relationship, and *sambandha* is a very important term. There is relationship within the Divine Reality. Sorry, um, I was hiding, uh, and that internal structure is expressed by *trika*. And *trika* means the three metaphysical realities: Śiva, Śakti, and Nara. Now, as you see that all the three are comprised, are contained within the overall, all-pervasive consciousness. And that which both transcends and encloses this multiplicity is *Anuttara*, the unspeakable. So, that has no name, it has no form, it has no, uh evident, uh. It is that which is both the most internal, most intimate, and the most all-embracing. That's *vyāpaka vyāptita*. That's *vyāpaka-tvam* is one of the most essential characteristics of the Divine in Kashmir Shaivism: the all-pervasiveness. And all-pervasive is only consciousness.

Now, if you go to the structure of the *trika*, then Śiva. Now, Śiva is not the absolute. Absolute is *Anuttara*. Śiva is the Divine, or whatever you may, uh, translate it is. And also it doesn't mean that it's at the top of a problem that has no hierarchical implication. Śiva, Śakti, and Nara. Now, Śiva corresponds, and there are so many other things corresponding. There are the three basic energies: *icchā*, *jñāna*, and *kriyā*. So, *icchā-śakti* is at the, the, the origin, uh, of any knowledge or activity, is at the level of Śiva. *Jñāna-śakti*, the energy of knowledge, is at the level of Śakti. And *kriyā-śakti* is at the level of the individual soul. And also Nara doesn't mean only man. Nara means also the whole of objective reality. And this is also distributed among the three grammatical persons. So, uh, we see that *trika* is expressed in the, in many language. The three grammatical persons: I, you, he, she, it. So, Śiva is the pure *aham*. Śakti is from relation, and Nara is the objectified, or, uh, objective, uh, reality, which can be personal or impersonal: *sahasa*, *saha*, uh, um, whatever can be objectified, uh, is, um, the third person. First person, second person, third person. And there are a lot of speculation also on that, because this is where we have an access also to that *trika* by our own language, our own experience, through, uh, relationship.

Now, at the, the question is, where, if everything is enveloped by, and pervaded, and in the innermost center, uh, is pure consciousness, which is *Anuttara*. *Anuttara* can also be something. Then where does the trouble start? Where does the trouble of bondage start? Obviously, it starts at the most external level, which is that of activity, creativity, and of the externalized consciousness, *idam*. So, when, uh, the consciousness, it's always question of the consciousness what makes us distinction, man from animal, uh, loses its connection with Śakti, and with Śiva, with the other aspects, or with the other energies, energy of knowledge and energy of, uh, will, then it detaches itself from that totality. Not in reality, but in its own consciousness. So, it closes that consciousness of belonging to that totality of being in that *Anuttara*. Of course, consciousness of *Anuttara* is the highest. So, the only *śuddha-buddha* has that consciousness. The consciousness of Śiva is that is more common, because it's also personalized, uh, divinity, and, uh, we can relate. So, the, the separation from the totality, and we have seen in the whole previous, um, description of, it's, everything is a personal agreement that holistic vision, that *sarvamatā*. And not only the internalized, but also the global, universal, inclusive, holistic, uh, vision. And the moment you lose sight of that, and that is where Nara loses touch of Śakti, Śakti in the sense of, um, *jñāna*. In the sense of knowledge. In the sense of insight. Then, uh, there is an apparent, uh, split. So, you can make this whole thing also as pyramid, but this is just, uh, a scheme which, um, illustrates the relationships between the absolute and the three, uh, aspects of the *trika*. The three realities of *trika*, which are not separate, but which are experienced, uh, and described, um, as so that differences also, they are not separate, but they are distinguished. So, one can distinguish between Śiva and Śakti, but one cannot separate them. So, this is very clear, um, even in, uh, Western philosophical language, that, um, distinguishing, yes, but not separating. That's why the greatest sin in this system is *bheda*. *Bheda* means separation, uh, the not distinction. You distinguish, because, uh, you don't deny difference. Difference is not denied, but it has to be seen in its total context, and in its relationship. That's why *sambandha-sāvadhānatā*. Subject and object, everybody knows. But the yogi is aware of that relation. So, if you lose that *sambandha*, then you are on the way to becoming a *paśu*. And, um, that's why whatever people do in, even in normal religious activity, you go to some temple, or do you do some *pūjā*, and this that. It's all trying to establish that relation, you know? To, to connect with that power, with that Śakti. And even the simple people who go to a temple, you know. They, they want to get connected. And, uh, so from the ordinary religious activity, to the highly meditational, spiritual activity, that attempt is to connect with the whole. 

Now, what our text does, it doesn't give a systematic, metaphysical overview over this whole thing. But I mean this applies practically to the whole of the *trika*. I think that. You know. Uh, yes. I, I wanted to know two things. One, I looked at what is the etymological root of it, because this, for the first time, I am hearing this word, and I am very keen to understand this. Yes. And second, I was thinking, as very beautifully this full, uh, connection has been shown in ordinary life, this also, uh, maybe interpreted in a, in a way that, uh, the actions, when they are not guided by understanding. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And what is the purpose? What am I doing it? Yes, yes, yes. When the whole thing gets messed up. Yeah, yeah. So, they get separated from their source, and that, that's what we have this beautiful expression. Uh, uh, uh, um, *karma*. What was it? Those who are workaholics, they, they, they get so attached to their actions, but they don't know anymore why they're doing it. The, the. And this is our modern, uh, life is a very typical, uh, example that people are doing so many things. And if you ask them, "What is their motivation? What is their purpose?" And, and they are at a loss. Um, they just, because they have to keep up the system running. And, and another thing. Yes. And is, um, I'm not aware now, but I, we have, uh, read it. I mean, Shivalaya must have used it here and there, but we didn't read from A to Z. Um, um, is that very neutral term for the absolute reality, means literally, "That which has nothing beyond it." And, um, it is the. The, the text which is describing, and this is what my forthcoming book, uh, a commentary on the is. The tantra. And we are here at the stage of the early stage of Kashmir Shaivism. Even is still very early. tantra is one of the basic tantras of the school, which, um, has the only direct commentary on the tantra is on the. The others are, well, has made the, um excuses and so on, but not a direct commentary. Now, the tantra starts with the question of the Devi. She asks. I mean, the question itself is so. I, I always say, if I stay with this one question of the Devi for the rest of my life, this is enough. So, she asks how to realize that absolute by which one gets entrance into, uh, the consciousness power teacher, into the harmony with the consciousness power teacher is, and, um. So, the, the whole question already contains, uh, the answer in, in a way. But she asks, "How?" So, it's not only describe what is that, but how to realize it, how to experience it. And then the whole text is, um, explanation of this first question. It is absolutely fantastic. I mean, one could have a seminar on this, but that would be only for advanced students who have some background, you know? So, this is that tantra which, um, deals with. And what does he gives 16 meanings of, and, uh, so that is, uh, yeah. 

And are all the the and even, aren't we also locating, identifying means of finding the? Of course. 

How are these three texts different, then? Uh, I mean there are so many texts, and each one has its own specific approach, and specific, uh, I mean, uh, is unique in, in this under 112, uh, *upayas*, or, um, *dharanas*, you, you don't find anywhere else. And is also unique. So, every tantra has its own, uh, great contribution towards, uh, the experience of that. And, uh, that's how the whole tradition has developed, and, uh, all these commentaries have been written and expanded, um, and to come ever closer to that, uh, reality. So, because you say, I've not spoken of, um, at least I had to mention this. So, it in later stage you may read this text. It's not easy. 

She asks for the etymology of. Hm? 

She asked for the etymology? I said that which has nothing beyond it. And then he gives 16 etymologies, so I'm not going to go into that now. Yeah. 

How do you spell that, uh? 

Yeah, tantra is, is the tantra which, um, of the, the goddess of the, the supreme goddess of the three. *Para* is the supreme goddess, but supreme not as an adjective, but she is *Para*. *Para* is her name, is her essence. And she's the, the, the ruler. So, that deals with. But when you speak on. 

See what is, um, maybe troubling the Buddhists, uh, too much of theism. But this theism is always transcended by, because is not, is neither personified, nor it is, uh, it is beyond everything. And another one meaning, which he gives, of course, I'm not going more into that, is that means also answer. "That which has no answer." That means where question and answer disappear. That which is unanswerable. So, the, once I wrote an email to, he was a great scholar of Kashmir Shaivism, and I wrote at the, and in the, and he wrote back, "Yes, yes, yes." Because you're not answering. That's why. You're not answering. 

So. Now, this, um, I just wanted to give us a background for what we approached, what we discussed yesterday, about the state of. The state of bondage. Now, how does the, the text, our text, describes not the metaphysical reasons for the state of, but the psychological and spiritual causes of becoming a bound soul. So, that is different from giving the metaphysical reason. Metaphysical reasons, but he will come. He will recognize some of these terms, because he will come to the. Now, the cause, from the divine point of view, is the. So, nothing is outside that, or. She was the, the total, all-pervasive consciousness. Not even the state of. And according to this, it is Shiva himself who comes down to the state of. 

But that the text will tell us when we come to it. And and are not the same. 

Hm? And are not the same. 

Surely not. The, the second and the third person, how can you identify? But anything which is beyond the self, I club it as one group. See, the, the human language is an expression of reality. And if. Almost I don't know, Chinese or Japanese, maybe you have a different structure. But, um, in the, in the European languages, we have three persons: first person, second person, third person. And the second person is always a term of relationship. There is no you or thou without an I. So, that, that is a term of relationship. And is that relationship. She's always in that I-thou relationship, in that connection. And the third person is detached, this from. 

Hm? Beyond. 

Yeah, outside, uh. 

Outside. Yeah. 

So, now we come back to the text. So, that yesterday's, um, character, we are not going into the details, uh, of the, and we come to, uh, 14. Um, in the introductory verse, the author shows in detail how the bound soul is bound and trapped by limited knowledge: . Now, those who have done the, uh, they remember this very important pair of terms: and . So, what, what, what, um, constitutes the bound soul, or what constitutes bondage, is that means the, uh, restriction. That, um, uh. What is that the translation of ? Construction. 

Yeah, hesitation. 

Of course. 

Could be hesitation? Yeah, limitation, of course. But, um, is specifically something very, uh, concretely, uh, express something constraint also. 

So, the same, uh, qualities which are, uh, universal, they become restrained and limited, uh, in the bound soul. And the cause of this is, um, analyzed in the next verses: . 

Don't follow my, uh, example. I'm not sure that. It's beautifully expressed. Because what we are losing by our bondage is a loss of the supreme blissful nectar of immortality: . The loss of that blissful nectar of immortality. And this happens by .  means the arising of . Now, what is ?  are ideas, um. Um, she has a different.  has a different translation. She says, uh, "Reaction." But I don't agree here. I don't agree with her translation here. But Mark's translation is much better: Operating in the field of the subtle elements, the arising of mental representation marks the disappearance of the flavor of the supreme nectar of immortality. Due to this, man forfeits his freedom. So, this, this quite, you have the translations. So, mental representations. Now, what's the difference between  and ? So, all the time we have been trying to, um overcome , or  is of course any thought. But  is it somehow concretized thought, you have a particular ideas, you know? And as  says afterwards, these ideas are not only our personal, we have inherited them from our tradition, from our education from. So, all these ideas which are, what we want to say about this a *akṛtimā a ham*, you know, that either the child or the enlightened men, they are free from this kind of identi- identification with ideas. 

*Tathā.* Can we say constructs? 

Can we say constructs? Yeah, mental constructs. I mean, even the *vikalpa* is translated as mental constructs. 

So, the two are very much, um, uh, connected. They are also tantalizing the the ab high, which he reaches the state of unfreedom, *asvatantra*, that he loses his freedom, because it is so identified with these ideas, and with his concepts, and, uh, and we know, I mean this can be expanded to the whole, uh, uh, situation, uh, the world over, because why do they, um, political tensions? Why can it not be overcome? Because everybody is so fixed on their ideas. Why cannot Kashmir be resolved? They have, everybody has their fixed ideas. And, uh, so to dissolve these fixed ideas, and that is, uh, the only way of, um, a liberation. And being bound by these fixed ideas is, leads to a lack of freedom, loss of freedom. *Sacetanamatakośa*, and this is the, the field is, this is about this *kośa*, and the field of operation of the *tanmātras*. 

Now, what are the *tanmātras*? This is in between, um, uh, we have spoken, five gross elements, and the five senses. There is the area of the five *tanmātras*. So, the *tanmātras* are the subtle elements which are in between the gross elements and the senses. So, they are the, the objects of sense perception are the subtle elements, and not the gross elements. You cannot perceive *pr̥thivī tattva* as such, you can only perceive the, the *tanmātra*, that subtle element. Um, so he will, uh, Kṣemarāja will go into this *tanmātra*, but why this is the field, the area of the sense objects, *tanmātra*. 

So, think these four components of this, um, process of becoming a bound, a soul, um, uh, he clearly expressed. Let me see. Uh, Sylvain. *Il y a chez l'éruption des réactions, c'est pour lui la perte de la saveur de la suprême ambroisie. En conséquence, il est réduit à l'état de dépendance et cette éruption a pour domaine des éléments subtils.* Uh, the only difference is this *réaction*. I, I don't, uh, uh, agree with reaction, because reactions are only, uh, they are not, uh, they are not fixed reactions, they are spontaneous reactions, or something. But *pratiya* is something which a fixed idea. So anyhow, that, uh, it's another matter. 

And, uh, this, uh, *tanmātra gocara*, when you look at this scheme, this belongs to the sphere of *idam*. So, that is the objective reality, but that which is external, which is, uh. 

And it's so beautifully said, because what you lose is not only your freedom, but this, this, uh, bliss of this supreme experience of nectar, *paramṛta svabhāva*. You, you lose that blissfulness, and the immortality connected with it. 

So, uh, it's not only an abstract. Okay. And, uh, Kṣemarāja. And he says very clearly, this *pratyayas* are not only *laukika*, but also *śāstriya vikalpa*. They are thoughts arising from worldly. Simi- most people are, uh, in- influenced by just what is going on in the world, and what other people are thinking, and so on, and so on. This all *pratyayas*. But even *śāstriya*. Even scriptural, um, um, uh, ideas which arise out of the *śāstras*. And we know, I mean this is, uh, uh, I am living in this world, how scholars can be so stuck in their ideas, and it's, uh, even more difficult for scholars to be liberated from this *pratyayas*, because. So, the rising that bound soul of ideas, whether pertaining to the world or the scriptures, and of the knowledge of different objects associated with them, leads to ruination. 

What is ruination? Uh, uh, *ativāsanā tanam janam vikalpanam ati utpave vināśa. Vināśa*, yeah, ruination. *Vināśa.* 

That marks the disappearance or subsidence of the bliss of supreme immortality, that is of the flow of the bliss of the mass of consciousness. 

So, what is this *paramṛta*, uh, *svabhāva* means *cit kanaś ca ānanda prasarasya apaya*. The loss of the flow of the bliss of consciousness. *Cit kanaś ca ānanda prasarasya apaya*. *Nimajjana* means the, the, the *majjio*, loss. 

So, the state of supreme consciousness is present even when the ideas conveying the sense of different objects arise.  *Udetiśo bhina udeśa udeśa pratiya eṣu cit bhūmau hi sthitā sthitā api paramṛta aparāmṛśamānā.* But because they are, one is not aware of them, because it is not noticed or one is not aware of that, it appears to be absence. 

So, even ideas conveying the sense of different objects arise out of the same consciousness. But one loses that awareness, and then it gets separated. Hence, it has been said that the bliss of supreme immortality disappears. By the rise of those ideas, the bound soul loses, loses his independence. That, this comes under their clutches. They are meant of these ideas, but they are. As has been said in *Śivasūtra*. And this is, uh, um, a limited knowledge is the cause of bondage. *Jñānabandha*. This, we have the two opposite depending on the, uh, condition of the *upayā*. This, we have also seen in childhood, is dependent on his parents. Also both, that he means here, uh, the. I mean, this sounds like *Manusmṛti*, but this is Vyāsa. So, *jñāna*. *Manusmṛti*, of course, is about this dependence. So, the whole, um, situation of being dependent on, uh, people's opinions, ideas, uh, uh, up to the political sphere. You, you are dependent, you are s- you are stuck there. *Asvatantra*. 

And now comes, um, this is one thing which we have to do. Uh, there are some, uh, *yoginīs* in Kashmir Shaivism. And they are, sometimes they make their appearance, and they are quoted. They, they will be only quoted if they have written or said something in Sanskrit. There are *yoginīs* like Lal Ded, and so on, they have, uh, probably sung in Kashmiri. That is not, will not be quoted then in a Sanskrit text. But there are some *yoginīs*, and they, uh, even Abhinavagupta quotes them. So, then some wise, uh, sayings of these *yoginīs*, and being women, you know, their sayings, uh, are so very down to earth. So, there is one *yoginī*: Madanikā. And, uh, there is Ma- sorry, Madalasā. Madanikā is another. Madalasā. "Do not indulge frequently in your association with material assemblage." That, uh, "Bredding sometimes with all father, sometimes all daughters, sometimes all mother, sometimes all beloved, sometimes it's mine, sometimes it's not mine." So, this whole attachments, you know, this whole field of being so attached, so dependent on the, the family members, etc.. But this is very funny, because that abbreviation from where it is quoted, uh, it is nowhere explained what is the text. And both Sylvain and Jadunath Singh have only *mapā*, uh, na, sorry, *mapū*. So, *mada, mada, mada, ma*. Madalasā. *Pū* cannot be *purāṇa*. I, I, I have not found this. 

From where, from where she's quoted? 

252 15 250. Yeah. 

Yeah, it's supposed to be Abhinavagupta. 1525. And they have copied from each other, I'm sorry to say. But I don't have here the, the, you have the Kashmir Series edition in your computer of the *Tantrāloka*? The mistake may be also copied from the original edition, but then they didn't check it, uh, what is this *mapū*. Also, I mean, this, this seems to be very, uh, plain, um, uh, saying, uh, of this Madalasā. But the beauty is, first of all, she is quoted. And second, that common bondage of being dependent, as you said, uh, like the *Manusmṛti* says, you know, a woman in her childhood, she's dependent on her father, and, uh, and when she's married, dependent on her husband. And when she is old, she is dependent on her son. So, this whole, uh, social structure of dependence, um, uh, that is questioned here. So, when you have to reach that spiritual freedom, there's no question of, of being other than dependent on, uh, the, the social structure. 

Now, the rise of ideas, *pratyayotpatti*, is said to be *tanmātra gocara*, because the sphere of this ideas is *tanmātras*, which are the generic features, either intense or moderate, of all objects. *Tīvra atīvra bheda sāmānya vr̥ttayo gocara*. 

Now, *vr̥tti*, you remember from *Yogasūtra*, the *vr̥ttis*. Um, so these are also *vr̥ttis*. These are mental movements, mental, um. How do you translate *vr̥tti*? 

Fluctuations. Fluctuations. 

Mental fluctuations? 

Yeah. So, these are all *vr̥ttis*. So, they, this *vr̥tti*, like *cittavr̥ttinirodha*, then, uh, *vikalpa* and *pratiya*. They are very closely related. They are not identical, but every, um, uh, *vikalpa* is also *vr̥tti*, because there's a some mental, uh, movement, some mental. And also *pratiya*. When an idea is, uh, formed, or you identify yourself with an idea, that is also a *vr̥tti*. And, uh, it is also something which binds. 

And this is all connected with the field of, um, *tanmātras*. So, the, the subtle elements of the subtle sense objects. But this, the author says, "As long as there is the appearance of different objects, so long the individual is truly bound. And by means of the teaching imparted before, he has the unserving knowledge that everything is identical with the self, then he is liberated while alive, as has been said. One who has this knowledge, etc.." 

We'll refer to, uh, *Kārikā* 25. Yeah. 

Can you go back to the previous paragraph and explain the terminology a little bit more? When you say the, the subtle objects, not the subtle objects, and not the. 

Yes, yes, yes. Yes, yes, yes. The, the sense objects which are, uh, in between the senses, and it's actually not the matter, as in between the sense and the object. That, that not the physical, external object, but the perceptibility of the, the object. That is the *tanmātra*. The object. The object of sight, of hearing, and so on. So, all the, uh, or the five, yeah, yeah. The. Then, uh, the. 

No, but he has connected before. The, the, the previous characters say that the cause of bondage is *śabdatarāśi*. So, that whole collection of sounds, words, language, etc., etc., etc.. But this language, this, um, words, they first depend on ideas. So, when we have this scheme of the four levels of *vāk*, before an idea is formulated in language, it is, uh, it is at the level of thought. And that thought is either *vikalpa*, or *pratyaya*. And then only it becomes, it, it gets expressed in language. And the more external it becomes, the more it is removed from the source. If you think of language, then from the *parā* perspective, the moment you reach *matijñāna*, you are already in the realm of *pratyaya*, of thought, of *vikalpa*, etc., of *ṛti*, *citta vṛtti*, and so on. And then, only you come to the expression. 

Okay. So, the introduction of the next. A doubt arises here. If the rise of ideas in the bound soul means the disappearance of the bliss of immortality, then not yet expressed in words, only the thought is there, and then they become internally, ah, formulated until they are externally formulated. So, what, how a small child learns language. Ah, that Abhinavagupta goes into this very beautifully. Because he says, actually the child has, um, a connection with the pre-sentient level of speech. So, we can make this connection, of course, by the many other factors, observing the parents, etcetera, etcetera. But this, um, being still closer to the source of language, and not yet fixed. And then the moment they learn, um, a language, a fixed language, then it becomes this *pratyaya*, so these words become associated with ideas, and then, ah, this is a very brief, um, hint that this whole topic which is also, uh, in the, ah, *īśvarapratyabhijñā vimarsini* of Abhinavagupta. *Vimarsini* goes into that question of learning of language, the stages of consciousness. 

So, that is not coming from society. 

Hm? That is not coming from society. 

Yeah. This pre-. The pre-, yeah, is not coming from the. 

Yeah, yeah, yeah. 

Can we do one more? I think it would be just, um. I didn't calculate it like that, but if we do one more *kārikā* in the afternoon, we can complete this whole section. And then we have only the concluding two verses. We will just repeat, because we had already done it in the beginning, but it's important to repeat them. 

Could we conclude at 4:00, because I'm leaving at 4:00? 

Hm? Could we conclude at 4:00? Could we. Would we have finished everything by then? 

I, I think so. I think so. 

You want to go somewhere? 

I have my bus to go tomorrow. 

Oh. Yeah, yeah. That we can. Because we have only three verses left, and this could. Concluding the introductory verses. Concluding what has been said in the previous three verses, and strengthening the previously described identity of this, uh, extensive objectivity with the generic *spaṇḍa* principle, *sāmānyaspaṇḍa*, the author defines it in the following verse: "Liberation is identical with the recognition of that *spaṇḍa*, and bondage is identical with its non-recognition." So, here it's a question of  *pratyabhijñā*, or *apratyabhijñā*. *Sā iyaṃ kriyāśaktiḥ śivaśya paśupātinī bandhāyatrīsva māgasthā jñātā cit*, um, no, sorry. *Jñātā citi upapādikā*. This what has been described before is the power of activity of the Lord, *kriyāśaktikā*. So, that's what we have here in this power of objectivity. *Kriyāśakti* is the one which is going further away from this source of consciousness, *kriyāśakti*. This is the power of activity of the Lord, *paśu pātinī*, who, um, uh, we who exists, or which exists in the bound soul. So, this  *kriyāśakti* is the *shakti* which is most operative in the bound soul. And *bandhāyatrīsva māgasthā*. She, she becomes the source of bondage. 

A *kriyā*? *Kriyā* is derogatory. 

Hm? 

The word *kriyā*. *Kriyā* is derogatory? 

No, activity. But if she, if it binds the soul, then it's. 

You don't think of the word. You think of the activity. See, if you are. We have this beautiful expression that, um, people who are too much, um, constantly engaged in, in their activity, and, and by losing that source of knowledge, and of consciousness, they get estranged from, from that consciousness. So, *kriyā* is, is a totally, uh, universal and neutral word. But among the three *shaktis*: *icchājñānakriyā*, *kriyā* is that which leads, can lead away from the source. The, the just activity, you know? As we have said before, people who are just active, and they have completely lost the sense of why they're doing it. Uh, what is the whole purpose. So, let us just see the translation, um, "The same when realized as residing in him." No, really? NoI don't like this. "This Shiva's power of action residing in the fettered soul binds it. But when its true nature is understood, and it is set on its own path, this power bestows the fruits of yoga." 

*Citi*, I wouldn't here say the fruits of yoga, but the rest is. *Svamāgasthā* means when it, uh, it comes on its own path, means on its own spiritual path. And it is known, *jñātā*. She is known. Then she bestows perfection, *citi*. Sometimes I just prefer spiritual perfection. So, *kriyāśakti*, she can be both: diluting, or, um, bestowing *citi*, bestowing perfection. So that means this, nothing outside this total reality, it is, everything is within that *kriyāśakti*. But, if you do not recognize this, this energy which is at the source of *kriyāśakti*, then you get detached from the, uh, total process. 

And, uh, well, he says very clearly: *sā iyaṃ kriyāśaktikā*. And here you can relate to the scheme: *iyaṃ*. Uh, *idam*, or *iyaṃ*. It can be either feminine or neuter masculine, it doesn't matter. Uh, but here it is feminine, because it is *kriyāśakti*. So, she is in the realm of objectivity, of externality. *Iyaṃ* has been defined by the previous three verses. *Iyaṃ*. This one. "The operative power." Uh, operative I don't like it. "The power of activity." Or power, yeah. "Which is one's own real nature, that is of the nature of consciousness, identical with Shiva." She has been called, being called this, because she manifests herself in the form of objectivity. So, that's why before it says, um, um, *tanmātrakūṭāraḥ*. *Tanmātrakūṭāraḥ* means the field, the, uh, field of objectivity. "She is the venerable *spaṇḍa* principle. She is known as the power of activity, *kriyāśakti*, because she brings about the state of variety of the universe." 

And this is, um, see just this reconnecting that activity, that objectivity, with the source of the *shakti*. And she is in the very positive sense. This, she is the cause of the beautiful multiplicity of the universe. Without *kriyāśakti*, there would not be this whole beautiful variety of, uh, the cosmos. So, she is absolutely positive. But it's only when she is detached and objectified, disconnected from *jñāna* and *icchā*, that she becomes a source of bondage. So, this whole, um, beautiful variety of the, the universe is something absolutely a creation of the *shakti*, is absolutely positive. There is nothing negative about it. 

"As described before, she exists in Shiva, who has assumed the role of a bound soul." Now here, this is the reply: Shiva himself has assumed the role of a bound soul. He himself becomes *paśu*. And then there's a very beautiful image. We had this before, that, um, *abhiṣeka*, you know, besprinkling with, uh, she besprinkles this bound soul, who is identified with *prāṇa* and *bhūtāṣtaka*, with a drop of consciousness which makes him an agent, or a doer. Not *paśu* means, uh, that third person who is devoid of independence, who is dependent, who is separated, etc.. But in order to recover his or her own identity, this bound soul has to be besprinkled with a drop of consciousness which makes him, turns him again into an agent, into a subject, from being an object. Because a bound soul, uh, *paśu*, is, uh, precisely the one who is identified with the body, and with its, uh, psychic, um, uh, uh, body, which is called *bhūtāṣtaka*. The senses, and the *anaṣpabuddhi*, *ahaṃkāra*, and all that. So, being identified with that means *paśu* means an unbound soul, a refuse to the state. "He does not recognize his real nature, which is veiled by her, and gets involved in the misery of seizing and relinquishing. Thus, she becomes a source of bondage." 

And the yogi recognizes this up the power of action as the supreme power, *parāśakti*, the means of approach to his real nature, which is Shiva. Then, according to the view of *Vijñanabhairava* expressed in the following lines, "She brings about the highest achievement, full of supreme bliss." And this is the basic, basic verse of *Vijñanabhairava*. *Vijñanabhairava*. *Vijñanabhairava*. Bhairava is a very high title, you know? The highly respected, or divine, Bhairava. *Bhairavika*. Bhairava is also a title for Shiva, and Bhairavi for Devi. The, the great lady. Uh, so the *Vijñanabhairava* always has very high regard for this text. *Śaktyā āviṣṭasya nirvibhāgena bhāvanā tadā asau śivarūpī syāt śaivīm mukam ihocyate*. This is *Vijñanabhairava* 20. "When one who enters the state of energy realizes the non-distinction from it, then he becomes one with Shiva. Shakti is called the entrance leading to Shiva." 

Now here. Huh. The whole verse. *Śaivīṃ mukam ihocyate. Śaivīṃ mukam*. Now, uh, why he quotes here? Because *nirvibhāgena bhāvanā*, in a contemplation, in a meditation without, uh, distinction, without separation. *Nirvibhāga*. Because the cause of the bondage is the *vibhāga*. It's a separation. And then, if you meditate on the same *shakti*, you give her any name, in a state of non- separation, then you connect to that *śakti*, and through that *śakti*, she becomes the door of entrance to *śiva*. And this is very basic, um, was of the *Vijñānabhairava* about the mediating role of *śakti*. The *Vijñānabhairava* then teaches, "Even in spite of the dispersion of definite and indefinite ideas, regards the," the yogī, "regards the entire objectivity as an aspect of his own self, which, in its nature, is *śiva*. Then, also the *śakti* brings about the same achievement." 

So, this we already had that in spite of these ideas existing, but connecting to that state of non-difference, *abheda*. 

We have it. Lost the last. The *tadā śivaḥ asau parānanda-mayīṁ parāṁ sthitiṁ upapādayati*. "Then she bestows the supreme perfection on the yogī, which is full of the highest bliss." *Tadā śivaḥ asau parānanda-mayīṁ parāṁ sthitiṁ upapādayati*. So, it's always a question of either, uh, the loss, or gaining, of the supreme bliss of immortality: *amṛta ānanda*. It's, it's always in experiential terms, and not just the lack of knowledge, much more than that. 

And, um, he says rightly, and that is in his note, that the last aspect is a form of *śāmbhava upaya*, because in the *śāmbhava*, um, *upaya*, *śāmbhava* state, the yogī already perceives everything, even the external reality, as a part of the same consciousness. So, there is no question of any division, or separation. *Namah śivāya śatakaṁ. Namah śivāya śatakaṁ*.

Yes. You still want to re-recite it, but this is a different text now. 

Okay, I think this is, uh, enough for this morning. And then, in the afternoon, we will complete this section. And any other desire. Uh, we, we can, if you want, we, we can still, um, play that, uh, *Guru Stotram* which we couldn't play the other evening. Either at 11:00, or in the evening? 

The Kashmirī, uh, evening, evening. 

Yeah. 
