This is slightly a simplified version of what the same teacher, Ramchandra, first thought, that one which I taught you. And then uh, this is slightly simplified. 

So yesterday, we have come up to kārikā nine, and I want to come back to the theme which has occupied us until then, that is the theme of the senses, but only in one respect because I remembered one verse from the *Śivasūtravṛtti* which expresses it beautifully. And in the meanwhile, I discovered it. You remember we had distinguished the different, the senses as sense organs, which are lifeless, and the sense divinities, *karaṇeśvarī*, the *śaktis* guiding and impelling the senses as that which brings life into the senses. 

Now in um *Śivasūtravṛtti*, Utpaladeva says this in poetic language. Well, let me see, the the translation by Bailey, but I will do it a little more literally. 

> "Enlivened by you, the senses quiver though they be like lumps of clay; they dance like feathery fluffs of cotton raised up by the breeze." 

So, the the differences: our ordinary senses, which are bound by the our sense of individuality of *pūryāṣṭaka* being uh identified with all this um physical and mental and psychic uh state, the senses are like heavy, like lumps of clay, but they become enlivened by you, by the Absolute, by the Lord. And then they become light, feathery light, like uh fluff, fluffs of cotton raised by the breeze. So this is such a beautiful poetic expression of what we have been doing in a more analytical way. That when he says you have to examine your *parīkṣa*, you have to analyze what is going on uh with your senses. They are moving out and resting, and then uh being absorbed again, and so on. So that life which is in uh fused in the senses, which technically is called *karaṇeśvarī*, and here he expresses it so poetically. 

Now we have reached a very crucial *kārikā* in verse nine. And this shows you, as I have said already in the beginning, that neither this text nor the entire spirituality is meant for beginners. It is meant for advanced. Otherwise, you have just passed eight verses analyzing, you know, what is going on in the ordinary consciousness, and then what is uh in the senses, and and so on. And already you have reached that state where this sudden realization of the Supreme reality, supreme state occurs. And I, I was shocked once. Swami Chidananda Lakshmanjoo, he said, "The *Vijñānabhairava* is not for beginners, it's for masters." So even *Vijñānabhairava*, I, I was really shocked, and what am I doing teaching *Vijñānabhairava*? But on the other hand, we have nothing else. I mean, if we, uh, we have to rely on these texts, otherwise. So, not only for the sake of Adi, but for the sake of all of us, I will repeat, uh, *kārikā* nine. 

Now the, a few have expressed the desire that I should give my own interpretation, which I am doing, but I cannot help, you know, certain very important um quotations and passages given by Jaideva Singh. Uh, they are essential. Maybe I should have done my own, my own translation, but it's a little bit too much now. 

So uh, we come back to verse nine on page 63, Adi. And uh, that's in my own translation. 

> When the agitation of the limited individual comparing with the, that is in who is incapacitated by his own impurity and his adepts to actions, ceases or disappears, then the highest state appears. 

So this, this phrase which you will find quoted everywhere, *yathakṣobhaḥ praliyate tadā jñāt paramaṁ padam*. And so, I've given a little modernized interpretation of *karmāt yeṣa abhilāṣinā*. Those who are addicted to activity, addiction ceases um. 

Now, we know that in the Tantras uh there are two ways or two goals you can choose, that is *bhoga* and *mokṣa*. And uh normally, the Tantras, they offer you uh all kinds of uh goals. Um, *bhoga* doesn't mean just enjoying worldly uh things which anybody is doing anyhow. You don't need a Tantra for that, but um, uh *bhoga* means also um enjoying powers. See, most people in India if they practice, maybe statistically, practice Tantra to get some power, power in any way. I mean, maybe white magic, black magic, or anything. But uh that is *bhoga*. 

But here, immediately *paramaṁ padam*. So there is nothing. There is no *bhoga*. There is no, I mean *siddhis* come. Of course, *siddhis* come as a side effect. That is different, but the goal is immediately the supreme state. And that's of course, *mokṣa*. But *mokṣa* in this life. So that's why the whole um spirituality leads to *jīvanmukti*, and not to uh, uh uh, not to wait for, for that. 

So now we can proceed. Then uh page um verse 10, page 64. 

> "by non-worship and duership"

Because the objection was that he enters into such a highest state, then he will uh stop acting, he will not be uh an agent anymore. But on the contrary, this uh nature is by its innermost from, from the innermost being, it, it has that quality of non-worship and duership. 

And here again, the difference between - now this is really uh as it were, this is my commentary uh - difference between uh the know-, knowing and doing of an artificial ego, and the knowing and doing of an unartificial ego, the unartificial uh being. Uh, and and this you can observe. I mean, this is a question of uh experience. Uh you can, there are, as it were, two examples: on the one hand, a child. A child which has not yet been spoiled by education, and which is totally unartificial. And sometimes children express things, you know, which are totally uh overwhelming, but nobody has told them. And uh it comes from some other source. And it's the same. So, between the child and the sage, we are in between. We are spoiled by education, we are spoiled by our own um memories and thoughts, and whatnot, whatnot. 

And if you look at the saint, I mean I, I have experienced this with Ramana Maharshi, that unartificial, there was nothing. If you look at the photos in this book, no, there is never any pose. It's totally natural. And also when he was, I mean, the speaking or acting or, it's totally natural. Because some people, you know, then they have to say that, they have to show that they are the guru, and they. But there was nothing artificial. 

You have experience. So, it's between the child and the sage, or the saint, um, this *akṛtrimā dharmā*. And that non-worship and duership which belongs to that state, that perfectly natural state. And that is why he does. He can. He knows, and he does what he likes. So that he is, of course, no longer his individual, limited ego. And that's why the total freedom of the uh saint, the total freedom of the *jīvanmukta*. Before he has spoken of *akṛtrimā* um *svatantra*, *svatantra*. The same adjective, *akṛtrimā*, was used for *svatantra*. That is, totally natural freedom, perfectly natural freedom. 

And of course, in that is already implied uh implied already, the *siddhis*. He knows and he does what he wants; it means he has the power. Yeah. Yeah. There is a certain spontaneity, a certain uh *la la nature sans artifice*, *que caractérise l'omniscience et l'omnipotence.* Omniscience, omnipotence. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, but she has added uh because um. But the word itself is just non-worship and duership. But since it comes from that uh pure source, it is, of course, also uh *sarvajña*. Uh, there's a lot of discussion about the Buddha's *sarvajñatā*, a lot of treatises. So, what does it mean? And what does it convey? The omniscience and omnipotence of the um of the enlightened one. Because he is at the source, the source of knowing and doing. And uh of course, the, the precondition is uh in, from verse nine: "at the time of entering the highest state, uh whichever desires he knows or does that uh whichever he desires that he can know and that he does." He can do. No, this is a little bit from um, the commentary. 

So um, Kṛṣṇamācārya paraphrases *akṛtrimā* by *sahaja*. Now, *sahaja* is, is better known now. It is also because of popularization of Sahaja Yoga uh now uh, I am nobody to judge, but um who is really *sahaja*, and who is really *akṛtrimā*? So that needs, uh, there's still a higher authority to say who is *akṛtrimā*, and who is *sahaja*. But um I think it speaks for itself. The commentary doesn't add much to the meaning. I think the meaning is uh quite clear. 

But what is beautiful when he uh, Kṛṣṇamācārya says that "knowledge and action are of the nature of a harmonious unification of light and bliss." And this harmonious unification is *sāmarasya*. *sāmarasya avasthita prakāśa ānanda*, *prakāśa ānanda ātmani jñāna kriye*. Uh, which also means, I mean, this is a very beautiful way of saying it, that in the case of the ordinary, limited um individual knowing and doing, sometimes there is a, a big gap between uh what uh we know or what we say, and what we do. That is, here, in the case of the *jīvanmukta*, of the one who has reached that supreme state, it's not only there is no gap, but there is a harmonious union. And, and this is *sāmarasya*. And this uh union between *prakāśa* and *ānanda*, because *prakāśa* is knowledge, and uh *ānanda* is uh, I mean, doing is an expression of bliss. So, so this is a very beautiful uh additional understanding of what means knowing and doing in the case of that supreme uh state. 

So what uh many people, when, when they describe: "what's the difference between the uh an ordinary person and the saint?" Because in the saint, he, what he speaks, he also does. I mean, uh what he, he thinks, he also does. So there is no gap. Uh, there is no, between the words and the actions. So here, it's *sāmarasya*. So it is a harmonious union between the, the thought, and the, the no-, knowledge, and the action. 

So I think is a very clear description here uh of the state of a *jīvan-* 

> "full of wonder, *smayamāna*."

Full of surprise is uh, we have, I think yesterday or the day before yesterday, we had about uh *camatkāra*, that uh wonder and um surprise, which has both an aesthetic and a mystical uh implication. So if really some new experience uh takes place, then you are full of surprise. You are. You are full. You are wonderstruck. It's something overwhelming. *smayamāna*. 

> "Now, observing his own nature, *svabhāva*, or *" "*alokayam smayamāna*." 

So this is already uh, it's not only *samādhi*, it is also in *vyutthāna*. So, it's both in deep absorption, and in ordinary life. So then, observing your own nature, and being wonderstruck. Being uh full of surprise about uh this um the beauty and the blissfulness of, of that nature. 

But this *arthāt adhyātmabhāvena*, so that is subject to two uh, two different interpretations. Now if that happens to him, then where is the fear? Where is this uh *saṃsāra*? What, what is the uh fear of that *kuśṛti*? So it has really a negative um prefix, *kuśṛti*, that, that, a bad um dream of *saṃsāra* um, because *sṛti* is uh would be *saṃsāra*, but *ku* means a negative. I mean, uh that, that's why it is a cursed um *saṃsāra*, a curse to your life that *tasya iyaṁ kuśṛti kutaḥ*. So, what can this bad *saṃsāra* do to him? He's *kutaḥ*, *kutaḥ*, *kutaḥ*, *kaḥ se*. The, from where. How. How it will uh affect him? How will this bad *saṃsāra* affect him? *kutobhayam*, like in uh *śrutismṛtitvābhyām*. Whence the fear? Because *saṃsārakuśṛti* is precisely from where you are afraid, you know. You're. You're. You're scared of that. 

Now, this um "observing his own nature and being wonderstruck." 

Now, in the commentary uh he gives many examples from uh the *Vijñānabhairava*. First one is verse 26. 

We are also wonderstruck that the sun has come out. Yeah. Now, 26 um is. This um central practice with *prāṇa*. So you immediately see how this statement, it is connected with the practice. And very precisely. 

> "*prajñānaviviśet śaktimayyadvāpavikāsetyā nirvikalpatayā matye tayā bhairavarūpatā*." 

> The energy of breath should neither move out nor enter. When the center unfolds by the dissolution of thoughts, then one attains the nature of Bhairava. 

So, this is the description of this uh state of the practice. Well, is this a question? Is it a practice, or is it a description? Because actually, the practice precedes. Practice means focusing on these two points of the beginning of breathing out, breathing in uh or and beginning or ending points. And um holding their attention, awareness, there. But here, it is more a statement. So, the translation should, I mean, it follows the Sanskrit objectivity. 

But um, you can also translate it: the energy of breath neither moves out nor enters. Because it's the moment when uh, and this is very precisely connected with that moment of surprise, of wonder, *smayamāna*. Because in that moment when you're wonderstruck, you know, even in a natural um balance, you know, you become breathless. You have a, you look at something extraordinarily beautiful, and you become breathless. And um, so it is rather something which takes place, which you cannot make it. 

And then, "when the center unfolds by the dissolution of thoughts." And again, *nirvikalpatayā matye*. Uh that is again this question: is the *nirvikalpa* state the condition for the *mati* to unfold, or is the uh is the unfoldment of the *mati* the condition for the thoughts to dissolve? Um, so this is, you can only observe in your own practice. But uh what, what is uh what goes first? Of course, if you are very fortunate and uh and the *vikalpas* dissolve, um then uh the center unfolds uh spontaneously. And otherwise, you have to focus on the center, and then the thoughts will dissolve. But it's, they do are so close uh that it's very difficult to make any cause and effect. What is first? What is second? 

So, this is very significant that he quotes it here at this point, because "observing his own nature and being wonderstruck by observing his own nature" means it's just entering into that state of wonder and of being in the center. And that is, of course, what in the language of *Vijñānabhairava* is called *bhairavarūpatā*. We have called it here more um generally *svabhāva* um, his own essential nature, *tejas*, which is the nature of Bhairava, according to whatever Bhairava means here in this tradition. Of course, Abhinavagupta says, "It is spontaneous centered awareness." Spontaneous centered awareness. 

And now uh comes this extremely, a quotation from the text which has been lost, *Kakṣyāstantra*, which comes always at very crucial points. And what are the most crucial points in uh this whole spirituality? They are the point of the awakening of *kuṇḍalinī*. It is uh, now I don't know what Silburn says here, but uh she must be *Kakṣyāstantra*. So if there is any different uh. You can also. But where, where. No. No. 11. Commentary to 11. Commentary. Oh yeah, uh, she's probably doing that because he's, she's uh 11, 11. Where she's going from the suspender. 'Cause the suspender, suspender, *adhyātma*. She said, she's a *action universelle qui gouverne de l'intérieur l'univers entier*, *donc qui constitue aussi la réalité spirituelle*. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, it's okay. I mean, there's not much difference there. We have two interpretations, but it's not the third one. Now, uh what Kṣemarāja does is that he quotes that mysterious *Kakṣyāstantra*. I don't know if Mark has any uh manuscripts of that, you know. I've not, I've not come across, but uh maybe. And this uh this is a mystical practice. I mean, here there is no uh, it's something extraordinary. 

Well, let me try to read both the Sanskrit. 

> "*sarvaśaktiścitassā darśanādyāḥ sve sve vitīya yogapatyena viśvakṣiptvā madhye hṛdayasthaṃ sthababhūtas tiṣṭan viśvarūpa eko'vabhāsi*." 

It's a tremendous quotation. And you know, some of these lost texts, um of course, a lost Tantra is also something more mysterious than a Tantra which is published, and published, and translated, and commented, and so on. But um, some of these lost Tantras uh, always the same quotation comes here and there, which is extremely powerful. 

Well, let us see first objective things. 

> "Throwing by will all the powers, like seeing, etcetera, simultaneously on all sides into their respective objects, and remaining unmoved in the middle like a gold pillar, you alone appear as the form of the entire cosmos." 

It's a tremendous statement. So, what does it imply? This is: all the powers means uh all the sense powers. So, we have been speaking of the senses as powers, *karmendriyas*. He calls them simply *śaktis*. But, throwing all their, their energies into their respective objects. Simultaneously, we have such uh examples in *Vijñānabhairava*, which are, it's most difficult practices, you know, doing things simultaneously. It requires such a concentrated uh, tremendous power of concentration. And this is what, in our modern world, we have lost. What a tremendous power of concentration that people had! And when I'm thinking of uh Abhinavagupta, you know, he, he was not ready to be distracted by anything. And that's why, this total concentration, you know. And, and, and then, these things can happen. Uh these experiences can happen. 

So, "throwing all the powers," in bracket, "of the senses into their respective," uh, you know, she here says "by will." Huh? "By will." "By will." Uh yeah, well and it. That doesn't seem to be so spontaneous. No, no, no. It's a practice. It is a practice. *kṣiptvā*. Let me see what this is. *tiṣṭan viśva*. Um *śaktiścitassā*, *citassā*. But, *citassā* I would say uh to take *citta* more here like consciousness. Um, it's not will, it's not *icchā*, it's *citta*. So by his, see, *citta* here is the, the consciousness of the *yogī*. Of course, it's not the, the universal consciousness. The consciousness of the *yogī* uh, by his awareness. So, we have reserved the word consciousness for this big uh concepts like *cit* and *saṃvit*, and so on. So, we can say, "by his awareness," *svasve vitīya*, in their respective objects, sense objects. Simultaneously, yoga, but you know. But at the same time, "remaining stable in the center like a gold pillar." It's a tremendous experience, this uh image of the gold pillar. Imagined some *yogī* who had this experience, and then he expressed it like that. Tremendous Shiva. 

Now, we uh, those who have done the beginning Upanishad will remember that in some um Tantras uh, a very quick action is required. That uh uh, not slowly you know, meditating or something, something. But throwing your mind uh into something. That, that word, *kṣipta*, is used. And uh it is uh in certain practices um that very quick action of the, of the mind, of the awareness, or the consciousness, *kṣipta*, throwing. *madhya hāṭaka stambha sthitaḥ*. Remain established in the center like a pillar of gold. *Viśvakāra eko'vabhāsi*. 

Now, it's not said, you know, who is that one who remains as the support of the universe? Is it the *yogī*, or is it Śiva, or is it uh, it's not said. Of course, it's a uh, uh, uh, it's a second person. You alone appear as the form of the entire cosmos. You, *avabhāsi*. You manifest as the one, *viśvakāra*, in the form of the cosmic form. Of course, we have the revelation of Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita 11, where he appears uh uh not as a gold pillar, but I mean, he uh appears as a cosmic form in the *viśvarūpa*, and so on. So that uh, but it's different here. It is the experience of the *yogī*. And the whole point is what we have been going through in these last verses. That from the sense experience to reach that state. And sense experience, not that sense experience which creates *chopa*, which makes you restless. But at the moment when this restlessness uh disappears. And you enter into that supreme state, and then you integrate even external and internal, and knowledge and activity, everything is integrated. And uh, and then, the senses are also integrated. And, and these are the practices, or the experiences, whether you call it practice or experience, again the question, which are connected with that state. And that state which makes you full of wonder. Just by observing what you are. *svabhāvam avalokayan*. *svabhāvam avalokayan smayamānaḥ*. So for those, you know, Sanskrit, this is quite just enough, three words. 

And then he uh again goes on to the beginning of a Bhairava. And he comes to, he means *trimārjāḥ*. Comes to that which, in the tradition is turned as *bhairava mudrā*. This *bhairava mudrā*, *bhairava mudrā* is precisely that state where the internal and external are totally integrated. And, but it's also this expression of wonder, of, of surprise. Of uh. 

And then he quotes uh uh one verse of Abhinavagupta, his own master. In uh his Abhinavagupta has a hymn called *Anubhava Nirvedana*, the offering of experience, which consists only of four verses, and which describes that *bhairava mudrā*. And uh it starts like that: 

> "*antaḥ lakṣyo bahirdṛṣṭir nimiṣonmeṣavarjitā iyaṁ sā bhairavī mudrā sarvatantra suyogopitā*." 

Sorry, this is not Abhinavagupta's. Only the beginning is the same, um *antaḥ lakṣyo bahirdṛṣṭi*. 

> "The eyes open, looking outside, but the aim, the goal within." 

Having the goal within, and the eyes uh looking outside uh, *antaḥ lakṣyo bahirdṛṣṭi*. The same positions where he has given it as, um "Who beholds his own nature as that which sustains or creates um understanding in the light of," um Samata has taken it, "which presides over all the activities of life," *adhiṣṭhātrī*. Of course, *adhiṣṭhātrī* is a very powerful term. Um, is the, the one who presides, who, who is um um dominates. Um, I think both are possible, either in the more cosmic sense uh, sense of cosmic power, or in the sense of uh dominating um the activities, presiding over. Actually, it's not only um activities, but presiding over. Before it was a question of knowledge, knowing and action. So, he's, he's the *adhiṣṭhātrī*. He's now the center of the, the basis of both his knowledge and his action. So, I think that has to be related to the previous one. He's the *adhiṣṭhātrī*. See, normally what uh the, the limited individual uh, our knowledge and action is always determined by so many other factors uh, and not established in itself. But the *adhiṣṭhātrī* means is established in himself, in, in that sense. Okay. Yeah. 

Then in that state, how do we perceive other? There are also *adhiṣṭhātrī* for like, how, for one who is in the state of *adhiṣṭhātrī* and sees, like, the whole world govern is whole world, how will the other beings distinct from him? 

I see this, I mean, this question has not difficult, but uh the question is quite clear. See, the, the *yogī* who really enters in that highest state, for him there is no duality. He does not see anybody as different from that. And, and uh, see, this even making these distinctions of high and low, that now I have reached that supreme state, and these people are very low down, and so on. That would just prove that he has not had the experience. Uh, but uh that's, that why the *yogīs* are this uh *jīvanmuktas*, you know. They don't make any distinction. And, and they, they live in that center from where uh where everything else has uh is related. Then uh, they don't consider it as something separate. So if they enter into that central consciousness, which is the consciousness of everything, then they cannot distinguish anymore. And that's the basis of, that is the basis of uh of compassion. See, how can it be compassionate if you um consider yourself still separate? It's a beautiful um, uh I'm sorry, I'm remembering this out of context, but um, somebody came to Ramana Maharshi, he wanted to do some so-, social work. And he thought Ramana is sitting there doing nothing, you know, and uh he says, "I want to do something good for humanity." And then he said uh, he told Ramana, um "I want to, to help uh uh people, do some social work." And Ramana looked at him and said, "Just eliminate the 'I', and it will happen." So that, "I want to do", you know, if that is eliminated, then um your compassion, you're doing good will happen by itself. 

But is not duality also means the distinction between good and evil, merit to it? Yes, but only at that level. Only at that level, when, when you are, you are really integrated, everything, you know, then that distinction doesn't make any sense anymore. There is no distinction between good and evil at that level. So that's what I say, see if the *jīvanmukta*, or the enlightened Buddha, or, and so on, from, he can only be compassionate because he can see the, that the, the limitations of these distinctions. See, most of our problems come because we make distinctions, you know? And in that light, you know, in that uh, or in the power of that realization, these distinctions vanish. Just like uh he said, "like a heap of snow under the rays of the sun." 

But uh, it, it has to be at that level. Otherwise, the distinctions are there, of course. So I think we can break here, and um afternoon, we'll be a little faster, but in this, this strong text uh cannot be faster. 
