## Sai Sai energy 

Sai Sai energy... was... if I would say that this is one little word becomes clear that um...  _Śivamatra_ me... it somehow a little bit artificial division because it's not all about the body. It starts with the body, but then it goes on, uh, to other uh related subjects. But um uh it will be be this only um the part of it. So, it's not so easy to uh divide the chapters themselves into clear cut um sections, but it doesn't matter. 

The important thing is that is the connection. And uh the connection always has some um inner logic. And um the philosophic context, they have their their um external logic, but the spiritual text, they have their internal logic. And so if this connecting one uh derives from, comes out of the other um topic. That's why I find this little introduction, especially Ācārya, very uh useful. But he connects the with the problem. 

Now then um eleven was um very important, that is that the universal vision which the fully enlightened yogi is. And this uh universal vision which corresponds to the state of liberation. And then the um mentions generally dimensions, the _Spanda Nirvāṇa_, but uh it is, I think, useful to speak also about this aspect, the cosmic aspect. See, the Tantras are full of descriptions of cosmology. 

So, what is he doing here? The _Tantrāloka_ has one, a long chapter on um _Deśātman_, the way of space, and other long chapter on _Kālātman_, the way of time. So, what is the importance of this descriptions uh in the context of the _upāya_ of this spiritual means? Now, the um ritual context, on the other the basis, is the Śaiva um _śāstra_ is always the _Śaivāgamas_ which are revealed to all the subjects. And they contain, as I said, so many chapters on _dīkṣā_, on initiation. The process of initiation in the complete full sense of um the ritual initiation includes uh going through the whole way of space and time. Something incredible, space and time! 

Why do they describe um the classic um um way of describing the worlds, the cosmos, all the cosmic worlds, the _Bhauvanas_? There [are] 118 worlds according to uh Śaiva cosmology. And um and there are many descriptions which um um come very closely to that um physicist vision of an expanding universe. And maybe something incredible. But they have uh visualized. And this whole universal paths, _Deśātman_ and _Kālātman_, the space and time, it has to be integrated into the spiritual path. So, it's not, not that you go [on a] spiritual path and you completely abstract yourself from the, this cosmos. On the contrary, you have to integrate. And uh I have again of course, the ritual, these kind of pictures, they must be very um difficult to find nowadays. Who is capable of giving these kind of picture, even inside the Tantra, [is] very doubtful. But the descriptions are there. 

But uh from my personal experience with my master, I see, when towards the end, maybe one year before his final _Samādhi_, he spent some days in total silence, uh, fasting, not eating anything, not meeting anybody. And [then] when he came out of that, the first thing he said was, "I have passed through the 118 worlds." It's something, you know, just shaking. But it starts flowing, I think. So, it is not something which is completely only in the imagination or just only what is written in the Tantras, but it is an experience of this highly um evolved yogis. This passing through the whole cosmos because this is what is meant here, you know, this uh this universal liberation. So, you don't leave out any aspect of the universe in the spiritual path. 

And this is um _Ātman_, _Deśātman_ and _Kālātman_, um they are very much connected. And if you read the _Tantrāloka_, those chapters, they are connected with practice. For example, time, _Kālātman_ is connected entirely with _Prāṇa_. It's all internalized. See that the, the units of time are coordinated with _Prāṇa_. So, I, I'm not going into details, it's a very, very uh long uh descriptions, but um they are connected with spiritual practice. And _Deśa_, of course, we know this also from some other text, that the space is also inside, the, the body. And all the places of pilgrimage because they are all um all these _tīrthas_ and _kṣetras_, they are all um described in this section on space, and they are all located themselves in the body of the yogi. So, but you find the external description. And then it's all internalized. So, this is um the tremendously um beautiful also. 

He mentions the _Spanda Nirvāṇa_, but which gives a very beautiful cosmology, cosmography, we could say, description of the cosmos. But in the context of um initiation. But the condition for the um advanced or enlightened yogi is, of course, what Śiva beautifully translates to remain immobilized, to remain stable in, while viewing all objects. To remain in that internal rootedness or stability. And then, but being uh pervasive and... So, the whole um spirituality and this not only Śaivism, this in the Indian spirituality uh very widely so that, that always aiming at the totality. That's why the _sarvaṁ sarvātmakam_. Everything has to be, that totality. And um it's not sufficient to understand one part of the universe. We are not satisfied with that. _Sarvātman_ says all of it, the entire reality. And then to pervade everything with that consciousness. It is not like uh when the Tantra summarize the modern specialization, modern scientific specialization is to know more and more about less and less. But here you have to know more and more about everything. 

The come the closest then:  _prabuddhaḥ sarvadā sthitaḥ jñānālokya gocara ekatrārūpyasarvaṁ kṛtvā jñānaprakṛtilayam_. This is um uh, it says exactly that the awakened one, the, the, yes, the awakened one, Buddha, he is always established everywhere, _sarvadā sthitaḥ_, by his knowledge, _jñānātmana_, perceiving or observing all objects reality, _bhūtacara_. But _bhūtacara_ is such a nice word, I'm sure you know that context. Not really? What is...? What um how...? So, wherever, wherever the cow is grazing, that is _gocara_. So, the cow is grazing, that means her objects are the grasses and the, the, the... So, that has been transferred to the objects of knowledge. So, it's, it's that which you... It's very nice, you know. It's not really... very much what you have to digest, you have to... And it has nothing to do with cow, really. Yeah, and the knowledge has often been uh likened to eating and to swallowing, to absorbing um... This is not [a] very new idea. But so, _bhūtacara_, we have forgotten [all] these things. But sometimes the words are also speaking um nicely. If you say that [the] objective reality, it sounds very abstract, but if you think of the cow grazing... You know? But it's on the perception one should always remain in there. Now here the _bhūta_ is taken in the sense of um objective uh, so not the uh not the _bhūta_ as a category of yogi, but one should remain awake by observing all the objective reality. He [is] established everywhere, _sarva sarvadā_, everywhere on all this in state. And then what he has to do is this, beautifully, _ekatrārūpyasarvaṁ_. You should deposit everything in one place. _Ekatra rūpyasarvaṁ_.  The _upaniṣad_ [is] not afraid to, to, to, to... this wonderful one is not troubled by another, by something else. And [this is] because our experience of the non-dual self of course, has some other implications. [This is] because the, the inner experience [is] marked [by] fear, but at all time the yogi should remain well awake, this having this to practice the perception and observe the state of awareness. You should deposit all in one place, and so be untroubled by any Indian different practice... reality. Deposit everything in one place. And that [is] what he says now, that [is] what he says, yeah, yeah. 

So, this is still the consciousness of the universal vision of that: collecting everything into unity um, but see, they still think that this is very literally our _Upaniṣad_, or to mean to build up or to uh uh Eric says, this letting build up everything in one place, ah... so the two things which are required of the yogi is to, while perceiving even external objects, to remain in the state of awareness, of being aware. So, the consciousness it was _putra_ um alone. _Putra myth_ means also external um perception or perception of external things, but he should always remain established and remain awake, a book. And the second thing is to deposit everything in one place, into unity. So, this, this uh this uh if yoga means unification, then this is uh precisely this unification:  is being everything in the one, but not by uh excluding anything, but by including everything. And then he is not troubled by another. 

So, now this word _anya_, that becomes a starting point for a reflection on uh uh duality, because this is the condition for staying, being [in a] state of non-duality. But _anya_, not being, and this is a very ancient idea. In the _Upaniṣad_ we find the beginning of the _Ātman_ was alone, and then he was alone, and then he was afraid. There's a very uh this, I think, creation myth of the _Upaniṣad_. Then he said, "Why am I afraid? One is afraid only of another." So, wherever duality is there, fear uh starts. And here also, _anya_, not being. Because trouble is from another, another one, and not being himself. And not, not fear the other, but it's not meant in that sense. No _sādhaka_ says that [they] will have the others, but here _anya_ means just duality. Whenever you perceive a duality, there you are troubled. 

And then you must see [the] experience _sarvathā_. _Sarvathā_ means always in the sense of uh again uh waking state basically. Not only at the beginning and end, but even in the middle, so we have already had that. So, how by observing all phenomena, one should offer it to the creator? Now, this he interprets, _āropyet_, in a different way. Śaṅkarācārya is: _svabhāva sarvam āropyet nimīlana unmīlana tasya tasya yo dak abhedina jāniyāt_. So, he explains for this um one should offer or deposit everything means one should regard it as identical with the, what is fundamental principle, fundamental principle. Whether in introversive or extroversive state, uh _nimīlana_ or _unmīlana_, one should, by the firm grip of the initial and the final state, regard the middle state also as the conjunctive of the self of consciousness. 

Now, what there was something, the, the, the, the consciousness of _abhedina_, _ekakaram_, in one place. He explains as in one's true nature which is uh, which is Śaṅkarā, in Śaṅkarā. Who is one's true nature, _svabhāva_. Everything should be deposited there. Whether in the _nimīlana_ or _unmīlana_ state, in that. And one should know it in an undifferentiated, in a non-dual way, _abhedina jāniyāt_. One should perceive it in a non-dual way, _abhedina jāniyāt_. 

And then he concludes by the same uh quotation from _Śiva sutra_, probably the finish. It's a reflection. Thank you. _Śiva sutra_ _vāli_ 3016. 30 is Śaṅkarācārya [who] thought of it, feel already decided they would do this. And um... _yogi kalpanā dakkaman dalam paśyati śanikilam bhavatvam svātmapakṣa paripūrti jagat yasyadvitiya sukhinah kutobhayam_. Uh this uh... Now, I don't agree with your translation here, I have my own translation in this paper. Yeah. Um...  "He who perceives this whole universe of objects in a thought-free state, _avikalpa_, as your divine body, and who fills the world with his own self, is ever blissful, whence the fear". And um Silverman rightly says that this verse describes the passage from _turīya_ to _turīyātītā_. _Turīya_ now, do I have to explain this? From the, the transcendental state to the universal state. And this passage from _turīya_ to _turīyātītā_ happens through _kāmāmutra_ as we... _karma_. So, _kāmāmutra_ is a very important subject, but uh I'm not going into it, but just to hint to it. _Kāmāmutra_ means that integration of the, the internal and the external by _mudrā_. _Mudrā_ does not mean with the hands, but it means total attitude, total uh state, total uh... Yeah, simply mystical attitude. So, as Utpaladeva and the _Śiva sutra_ _vāli_, he does it in a, in a poetical, poetic way, but um he in that poetically he describes very precise uh uh spiritual states, very precise. So, that _kāmāmutra_ is here uh very clear. 

The condition first of all is to be thought-free, in a thought-free state, _avikalpa_. And then it, under _upaman dalam_, the entire universe, the entire universal sentience. But not only that, not only being in a thought-free state observing the entire universe, but identifying yourself with that, and that, seeing that as the divine body, _bhavatvabhūḥ_. _Bhavat_ is also one of [these] uh beautiful words: the universal divine body. And then filling it with the consciousness of one's own self, _svātmapakṣa paripūrti jagat_. Filling the whole universe with the consciousness of one's own self. That means it is uh the inner and the outer and the, and the, the self and the universe, and total integration. And if that, and whenever that happens, there is _dvitiya sukhinah_, there is bliss, and there's absence of fear, _kutobhayam_. Because, as I referred to the _Upaniṣad_, fear comes from another. Fear comes from duality, from separation. Duality means always uh _bheda_ means separation. 

And now this word _anya_ uh leads him to a big subject because the whole question of um the limited individual. So, we come back to the partial level, from the _supra-buddha_, from the highly enlightened yogi, we come back to the level of the _paśu_. Now, _paśu_ um is the technical term in Shaivism generally for the limited individual, and uh good translation would be creature, creature um... And uh the bound creature. Because in, in uh the um Shaiva Tantra of _pati_, _pāśa_ and _paśu_. These three: _pati_, the Lord; the bond; and the bound soul. Where is _pati_, _pāśa_ and _paśu_? That is in _Śaiva Siddhānta_, in the dualistic arguments in dualistic controversy, frankly speaking. But in the Trika, the three are Śiva, Śakti and Nara. And Nara is normally, is not called _paśu_, except when it comes to a description of the bondage. Because that is very much um the word for the bound uh soul is the _paśu_.  And of course, _paśu_ is a domestic animal; it's not a free animal. Domestic animals which are bound by... And _paśu_ also means rain. So yeah, _paśu_ means rain, no? _Paśa_ means rain. _Paśa_ means rain, or or less, less... The _Paśupati_ now comes to the where Śiva is _Paśupati_. So, he's _pati_, he's the lord of the souls, he's the lord of the souls. 

So, he comes to the whole question of bondage again. In the introduction, that _śivamantra_, it has been said in the previous verse, "Thus he is never troubled by another". Since the whole universe is said to be in the form of Śiva, who is it that gives trouble, and to whom is it that is troubled? In order to remove this doubt, the author says to ascertain the nature of the bonds and the bound: _śaptarāśisamūtasya śaktivargasya bhogyatām kalāviluptavibhavo ghataḥ saṃ sa paśuḥ smṛtaḥ_. 

Now we come to a very big subject, but I'm not going to uh get into the technicalities of it. The question: what is the binding factor for this binding of the naturally liberated? Naturally, because we have the word _akṛtrimā_, no?  _Akṛtrimā_ by, originally, totally free, naturally uh liberated. So, but what is the factor which binds? _Śaptarāśisamūtasya śakti vargasya bhogyatām_, not being deprived of his glory, no? Let me see another snake, take uh marks on this. Being... He was deprived of his power by the force of obscuration and is a victim of the powers arising from the mass of sounds is called the _paśu_. Being deprived of his glory by _kalā_, he becomes a victim of the group of powers arising from the multitude of words, and thus he is known as "bound one". _kalāviluptavibhavaḥ vibhavo ghataḥ_. Now, _kalā_ is a very difficult word to translate, because it has so many meanings. I remember, but I used five roots uh root meanings of _kal_. Do you remember that? _Kal_, five meanings of _kal_. But uh I, I don't know if I have... Yeah, yeah.  It's here on the computer. Here I would call it um, of course uh we'll get all the five meanings. Here I would call it the power of fragmentation. We have, once before also, talked about it. The deprived uh deprived of his glory by the power of fragmentation. He becomes a victim of the multitude of words. Now, what happens because thoughts and language are indissolubly connected? See, when there are uh so many thoughts uh coming and uh they're all connected with language, with words, and uh these words uh derived from what is called _śaptarāśi_, mean the collection of sounds of um of words. Do you remember? Yes, yes. 

The root _kal_ uh define is defined as follows: to flow, _kalākṣepa_. So, because it flows in the sense that it projects the universe, causing [it] to appear as though beyond it. Then, second meaning is to uh to go, to go, _kalagataḥ_. Because through it the projection returns to, goes to, its identity as consciousness. That meaning is, to know, also from _kalagataḥ_. Because it knows the projected in the sense that it represents it as identical with its own identity. Fourth meaning, uh, to count. _kalasaṃkhyāna_. Because it counts the projection in the sense that it distinguishes each element from all the others within its own unity. In the fifth meaning, to resonate. _kalāśabdaḥ_. Because it resonate, resonates, in the sense that when it is dissolved, the projection continues as the resonance of eternal self-awareness. Is it from _Tantrāloka_? Yeah. Yeah. Um, I don't know if everybody has understood, but um but uh... Could you repeat this, you know? No.  The, the five meanings of from... Five meanings of _kal_. The root _kal_ uh... First meaning uh uh to flow, _kalākṣepa_. It flows in the sense it projects the universe causing [it] to appear as though beyond it. Because the... The second meaning, to go, _kalagataḥ_, because through it the projection returns to, goes to, its identity as consciousness. The third meaning, also from _kalagataḥ_, to know, because it knows the projected, in the sense that it represents it as identical with its own identity. Then, the fourth meaning, to count. To count, yeah. Because it, it counts the projection in the sense that it distinguishes each element from all the others within its own unity. Yeah. Which is the point, yeah. The fifth meaning,  to resonate, _kalāśabdaḥ_. Because it resonates in the sense that when it is dissolved, the projection continues as the resonance of internal self-awareness. Yeah. Thank you. 

So, _kalā_ is also a _śakti_. And _kalā_ is the power of fragmentation and the power of separation. So, what happens when, when the um... let us say the soul or the individual being, is deprived of his glory by the power of fragmentation? And then becomes a victim of the group of powers. Now, _śakti_, as we have seen, there are 11 meanings of _śakti chakra_ in the first um _kārikā_, and _śaktis_ are not only positive, we have to consider that. The _śaktis_ are also deluding, they can also be deluding. And they are deluding in the moment they draw into multiplicity. Um so, and that is the power of fragmentation, which means making everything um separate and um into a multiplicity. And in the realm of language and of thought, it means _śaptarāśi_ means the collective whole of sounds, words, languages, this, that, and this ideology. Uh, something integrating and also disintegrating. So, here it's in the aspect of disintegration, which leads to multiplicity, to uh splitting, to fragmentation, et cetera. And that makes the _paśu_. That makes the bound soul. And that is why, I mean, the language, sound, word, it is, it is such [a] central theme to the whole of Kashmir Śaivism. And uh it's just in one _kārikā_, you know, with commentary, so... Because he has to bring it in, but it is not sufficient to treat it here. The important thing is to know that the whole area of sound, word, language, it is... has that uh disintegrating aspect of um too many words, too many uh which are leading into distraction, and the integrating aspect which is, of course, the whole _mantra śāstra_ and the whole um _vāk_ as the, the supreme divine power, uh _vāk_. And uh this whole text by Ṛṣika Utpaladeva is dealing with this question basically. 

So, this is uh very fantastic here, it's uh extremely brief and only because it comes, this is _śaptarāśi_, so we has to explain what is _śaptarāśi_. But we're not going into the technicalities, because that would be... So, uh, uh, uh... We said that uh I mean this world, the whole universe is the form of Śiva. Yeah. So, everything is happening in this uh universe... Yes.  is happening because of Śiva _śakti_. It is. So, even the force of uh fragmentation or obscuration, is also Śiva _śakti_. It is. But you see, the um... there is, there is also the Trika. So, in the Trika, you have Śiva, _śakti_ and Nara. So, why there is also the possibility, and that's why the difference between the enlightened, the unenlightened, and so on, that the unenlightened one, he uh gets distracted from the unity. And uh that's why all the time there is a reminder that you have to remain in that unity, in that oneness, and take everything into that um unity. And the moment you get uh distracted from that unity, then multiplicity starts. 

So, from where the distraction arises? I mean, why it does it have to arise? If everything, the entire universe is a Śiva _śakti_ and Śiva _śakti_ is really operating or regulating or handling that everything, it is. Why, why, from where that under-unenlightenment is really arising from the enlightened state of you? Yeah, yeah. He goes into this question here. He, he goes into this question. And then it is Śiva himself. But, since we have the Trika, so there is not only Śiva and _śakti_, there is Nara. The individual soul, the individual soul is, is a part of that uh trinity. And [as far as] Nara cuts himself off, or does not realize his uh unity with Śiva and _śakti_, then this whole fragmentation starts. So, that's why... Otherwise, what... This spiritual path wouldn't make any sense, if it was not also our effort to enter into that unity, to be um integrated into that um _ekatva_. Um, you know, the question is, why do I get separated from that? I mean, it's just like the, the raindrop from the ocean has come, it became cloud, it became water, it goes back again.  Okay, I see. Because the heat generated, there is a particular nature of law which is really working there. So, similar way, I was part of the Śiva _śakti_... Yes. And now we are saying that I was separated from that. What makes  separately? What is the, the cause of that? Yeah, the cause, the, the cause is, and this is purely under the spiritual uh it's not the theological... theological you can give uh or philosophical explanation, but in the spiritual um sphere, the cause are the five different factors, they're called _kañcukas_, and that's what he explains here at the beginning uh the first of these factors is _kalā_, the power of fragmentation. And um it is the same five powers which, as Shiva's universal powers, they become limited in the case of the, the individual because of his limited consciousness. So, the _kañcukas_ um he explains because _kalā_ comes, so he has to explain these five limiting factors. He gives many uh explanations. Uh on page 157 in the translation, um one interpretation of _kalāvibhūtivibhāga_, the word _kalā_ also means the power of limited activity. So, by _kalā_, what mean, uh by the power supported by this... This power implies also _kalā_, _vidyā_, _kāla_, _niyati_ and _rāga_. These are the five _kañcukas_, the five factors of limitation. _Vidyā_ means limited knowledge. _Kāla_ means limitation of time. _Niyati_ means limitation of um... It's very difficult to translate _niyati_... um determinism. And _rāga_, limitation of attachment. 

Now, this is a uh... I have to refer to an article which I don't have here, a very beautiful article on the _kañcukas_, which goes into the whole psychology of the interconnectedness of these five limiting factors, by Abhinavagupta. This is [a] really excellent article. Um because how these limiting factors, they um condition each other and they strengthen each other, and they prevent the soul from recognizing its true identity, which is the same five factors, but in a universal way. For example, the power... The limitation of time in the case of the divine is the, the uh unlimited manifestation of _Kāla_. And um so each one has a universal and a um um individual, individual um aspect. So, if... But it's the individual uh aspect which uh brings the soul down to the level of _paśu_. So, it may start with _rāga_, attachment... You have something? No. Could you explain that? Could you explain _niyati_ again? _Niyati_. Yes, he explains uh in the note on page 159. No. _Kalā_ reduces uh the omnipotence of Shiva, _sarvakartṛtva_ to _kṛtśaktitva_, limited efficiency in the case of the _paśu_. _Vidyā_ reduces the _sarvajñatva_, or omniscience, of Shiva to limited knowledge. _Rāgavati_ uses the _pūrṇatā_ and the fullness of Shiva to desire for particular things. _Kāla_ reduces the _nityatva_, or eternity, of Shiva to limitation in respect of time. _Niyati_ reduces the _sarvavyāptva_ or _svātantrya_, the absolute freedom, to limitation in respect of space and time and cause. 

So, this is a very big topic in uh exactly in what you're saying, in explaining why the _paśu_ is, why there is bondage. But this bondage is not [a] thing, uh it's not substantial. It, it is only also an expression of the freedom, because the _paśu_, or there's not... The _paśu_ is not free, but _māyā_, the third element of Trika, is also free. So, if it is free, you can free uh exercise its freedom either by becoming a _śuddha_ and _śuddha_, or by remaining in the limitations of um the _paśu_ con- uh condition of _paśu_. So, there's always new _paśu_. There's always _paśu_ coming on. Yeah. 

The, the question is uh we now actually to recognize our own state. Why are we in this state? Why are we not all enlightened? Why are we not all uh... So, then we have to analyze ourselves, instead of going to uh great uh theories which we can all explain, and there is a lot of philosophy in this world, volumes and volumes, explaining... Yeah. But first we have to examine ourselves: what is the cause of our um being bound by our own uh limitations, our own um unawareness? And that is what the whole text is teaching us. So uh that's why I mean we have to be conscious of that: every text has its own methodology. And this text is a text for mystical realization, for spiritual realization, and not a text explaining the philosophical reasons of um bondage and liberation and so on and so on, which Utpaladeva does in the uh _kārikās_ and Abhinavagupta does in this commentary, and so on and so on, which is... everything is perfectly there. But this text asks *us* to examine our own limitations and to make our own steps to uh that awakening, to that state of awareness. And that is... I mean, if you have missed that point, then this whole week was wasted. Yeah. Because the text has said it very, very clearly, and so many times. I don't say that's an easy question to answer, but um uh again and again, if you think of the uh beginning of the... The point is to get out of the state of our being bound by our _vikalpas_, by our thought constructs, into a state of limited... Now, these _vikalpas_ are connected with language. And language can be a means of bondage. And that is this chapter actually, what he says. And of course, if you uh the whole complex is so vast... When language, in the opposite direction, it ends in _mantra_. So, the condensation of lan- That's why it's called _mantraśāstra_, the whole thing. Which is that aspect of language which leads you back into unity. But the multiplicity of words and uh thoughts and um this _śabda-ārśa_, which is um leading away from the unity, and fragmentation. 

And then also, well I mean if you um analyze our... The way we live, you know, we are so much... with so much of wasted energy into language, into words, into... So much energy is wasted there. And this, this is that kind of um fragmentation which uh removes us from that free uh depositing everything in one place, into that unity. So, I think we should stop here. Um we have still tomorrow, and it will not be a problem to finish the text. We have five, six um _kārikās_ more, and um... 
