Once more than the first, _Akāśāt saṃśayam_, pūrṇī saṃbhūtā na tāvatī mande vicitrā tat patan citrāmpanupāvanti. Little bit the yaśo me śanemi śāpyam… Is it too low to hear? Yaśo me śanemi śāpyam jagatā palayo dayo taṃ śakti cakra bibhāvabhāvaṃ śaṅkaram swa yaśo me śanemi śāpyam jagatā palayo dayo taṃ śakti cakra bibhāvabhāvaṃ śaṅkaraṃ swa yaśo me śanemi śāpyam jagatā palayo dayo taṃ śakti cakra bibhāvabhāvaṃ śaṅkaraṃ swa…

And coming back to that expression, uh, in verse 11, _Adiśatṛi pāvanā_… I think the question was rightly asked. Um, and I found also Swami ji's, uh, interpretation. There are two, uh, _bhāvas_. That is _Adiśatṛi_ and _Adhiṣṭeya_. So _Adiśatṛi_ is the subject and the… The one who… Um… Who presides… Not who presides, who is the perceiver, and _Adiṣṭeya_ is the one who is perceived. 

Now, the… The whole difference is precisely in that shift to the pure subject. Pure subject means to that… To one’s true own nature, which is _akṛtrimā_, which is unartificial. And, um, a some other spiritual teacher once said, “There has to be the master in one’s own house.” So _Adiśatṛi pāvana_ is that; being the master in your own house. And not always being dependent on this and that, um, external influences or influences from others, but being the master in your own house; that is _Adiśatṛi pāvana_.

And, um, so Swami ji says, “There are two states of perception: one state is _Adhiṣṭeya_ and the other is _Adiśatṛi_. You should perceive this whole world as your own self.” Now, this is the… The second stage, uh, that you are the perceiver. You are the, um, the master in your own house, which means also that you are… You perceive everything in that light of that, uh, _akṛtrimā_, of that unartificial, um, _dharma_. And, uh, so this is very important. 

So the one who has, uh, attained that _paramaṃ padam_, that supreme, uh, state, and who is the… The center… The… Who is residing in the center, who is the pure, unartificial subject. So from that center, he perceives the whole world as, um, as of that divine nature, _svābhāva_. That _svābhāva_. But this all implies, I mean as, uh, it is, uh, expressed so briefly. And before also Swami ji, um, he sometimes expresses it in a more simple language. Um, that the obstacle, when he… He says _aśuddhi_, uh, his own impurity. What is the own impurity is simply extraversion because the… The change that comes is always _antarmukhatā_. 

And that is it. We have both also have done the, um, uh, _pratyabhijña vidyā_, uh, it was the same. But the moment that transformation takes place… Transformation is that from externality to internality. To interiorization, _antarmukhatā_. And, uh, this is what is, uh… The impurity is that externalization by _ahaṃkāra_. 

These two terms, they say that… Then you will get… This is from, uh, Lakṣmaṇ joo. “You will get wonderstruck. You will feel wonder in your nature. You will realize that state of God consciousness which you have not realized in past so many centuries.”

See, a question has been raised, um, uh, regarding _kuṇḍalinī_, but I am postponing it, um, because the theme of _kuṇḍalinī_ will come… The only a point where _kuṇḍalinī_ has appeared was in that wonderful quotation from the _Kaṭhopaniṣad_ about that golden pillar that, although his senses move in all directions, but he remains established within like a golden pillar. And that this… This golden pillar is _kuṇḍalinī_. But, uh, we will come to that, um, as the text moves in that direction. 

Of course, those who have done the _Vijñānabhairava_, they know that, uh, _kuṇḍalinī_ has appeared at the beginning and at the end of, uh, the _Vijñānabhairava_. So it is a kind of… Has made an arch, um, from the beginning to the end, and in between so many other, uh, practices are there. Um, but then it gets again connected to that, uh, central experience of the whole spirituality. 

And now we come to a more philosophical, um, discussion. Now, of course, we have to know that whatever philosophical differences there are, and there were, in among the different schools, they were also all based on experience. So their… Their discussions were not simply… Of course, there was a lot of, uh, logic involved, but here they… It’s all related to experience. How do you interpret this state of this supreme state or this state of total absorption, uh, and… And so on. Now, um, _Spandakārikā_ is not a philosophical text, but still it, um, argues in very brief… And very briefly, um, against three schools: that is the Naiyāyikas, the Vedānta and Mīmāṃsaka. So the difference, um, and the main argument is about, um, uh, non-existence by emptiness, but not… He says _abhāva_, not _śūnya_. 

So we… I don’t want to go into the philosophical argument because we have practically decided to stick to the _Kārikās_ and to the essential meaning of interpretation without going, uh, too much into the, um, philosophical details. Now verses 12 and 13, they deal with this, uh, question.

Now, what I said, uh, in the introduction that these schools they were, uh… It was not, uh, a fight, but it was a kind of mutual process of clarification and of, uh, even sharpening their tools and, uh, understanding better, uh, both the opponent and, uh, and, uh, their own experience. And I… You remember in… In Shimla, Torella used a beautiful example. So the discussions between these philosophies they were… It was not like fighting between enemies, but he compared it to the… The method used in the, uh, Asian martial arts. 

See what happens in, uh, in these martial arts. They, uh, they are not just attacking each other, but they are first observing what is the movement of the other. And, uh… And, uh, then they, uh, they both imitate the good, uh, movement, and then they also see the weak points. So then they attack the weak point. Um, but after learning that movement. So that comparison was very good because they observe each other very well. And they take over whatever positive they can, uh, accept into their system. But then they also discover the weak points and then, uh, there they start, uh, attacking. 

So, uh, I found this comparison quite, uh, useful. Because normally it is presented as, you know, these opposing, uh, systems, you know, “They’re totally opposed.” They’re not totally opposed. They have adapted and adopted, uh, so many things from each other. The intent is positive. Their intent is positive. Huh? Their intention is positive. Yeah, to improve upon. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.

So here it’s a question of, um, _abhāva_, non-existence. But you will notice, uh, I mean the word _śūnya_ doesn’t come here.

_Nābhāvo 'bhāvitāṃ eti na ca tatra asti apūrvatā yato 'bhiyogaṃ spṛśati tadāsīt iti niścayaḥ_.

_Atas tat akṛtrimam keyaṃ sauśukta bhavad asadā natu evaṃ smaryamānatvaṃ tat tattvaṃ pratipadyate_.

Mere non-existence cannot be an object of contemplation, nor can it be said that there is no stupefaction in that state. Because, on account of the application of backward reference, it is certain that it means the experience of stupefaction was there. Hence, the artificial object of knowledge is always like sound sleep. It is not in this manner, that is a state of recollection, that the Spanda principle is known. The Spanda is not separate. It only… _Tat tattvam_, that… That principle… That reality is known.

Now what he is distinguishing here between the, uh… Discriminating between, uh, a state of _akṛtrimā dharma_, this unartificial, and, uh, _kṛtrimā_. And of course, it’s all a question of discrimination of, um, of experience. Because, as we said in the morning, that even in the _Yoga_, um, _sūtra_, the, uh, the state of… What externally it seems as a state of absorption, but it can, uh, be also a state of stupefaction, as he said. And like, uh, Patañjali says, the _prakṛti layaḥ_. Those who are just… They are getting down into the level of _prakṛti_, and it seems as if they are totally peaceful and totally absorbed and so on, but they are not in that _paramaṃ padam_, uh, this, um, unartificial, uh, uh, nature, which is, uh, the ideal. So this discrimination is very, very important for any spiritual guide. And that’s why, uh, the texts have to discriminate. Otherwise, anything looking like, uh, “Oh, he has attained _samādhi_,” and so on… What kind of _samādhi_? It can be a complete delusion. And that’s why the criticism is rather, um, considering the state of _abhāva_, non-existence, um… And he doesn’t say _śūnyatā_, he doesn’t say _śūnya_. _Abhāva_, considering that, um, as the ultimate experience, and then he goes on arguing against, uh, the… These three, uh, schools. And the main point… I just, uh, only coming to the main point that, um, he summarizes that, um… The whole discussion on page 77 in the translation.

So if somebody says that, “Yes, now from 11 to 12, I have been in deep _samādhi_,” and then somebody asks, “What did you experience?” “Yes, I… At first, emptiness.” So how can you remember emptiness? So the question is this, um… The remembering of a state of emptiness… First of all, is not… Not a state of emptiness, and a remembered state of emptiness becomes something… Re-… Something objectified. Anything which you remember, you objectify it. So that’s the main point of the criticism. And this is also the danger of, uh, many, uh, _yogis_, you know, that, uh, they think… They think very greatly, “Yes, I was in a wonderful state of emptiness.” But what emptiness? It is you already, uh, uh, remember it, you call it, you define it, you, uh, you describe it; that’s not emptiness. So he summarizes, uh, that point. You know that the state of emptiness exists, huh?

How do we know that the state of emptiness exists if you can’t define it, it can’t be experienced, you can’t tell about it? How do we know that it exists and not the creation of, uh, somebody’s, uh, fantasy?

No, um, if you can’t talk about it, how do we know it exists? If you can’t talk about it, describe it, objectify it, then how do we know that it exists? Yeah, yeah. This is the whole problem. This, uh… This is the whole problem. How do we know that it exists in the first…? 

You see, now, let me come to, uh, a very simple analysis which, uh, I have done along with my, um, teacher, Panikkar. You have an experience; there are four stages, and this… I’m going away from the text. This is just a simple analysis. Four stages: the experience itself… And experience must… Maybe very deep, very authentic, whatever it may be. Then, you remember the experience and, um, the memory is already not the experience. And then you describe that experience to somebody else, or you write it down, or whatever. So the description is already the third stage from the… Away from the experience. Um, and then you use a certain language, of course, to describe it, and you use a certain, um, uh, terminology to which you are used from your own, um, tradition. 

So the same, uh, it may be… We… We cannot say if it is the same experience or another experience, but you describe it in terms of your own, um, tradition, or what you have learned, and so on. And then, of course, the fourth stage, that is, um, then leading back to the experience that, um… You know how these texts come about? It becomes a text, and that text you read it, and you are supposed to come back to the experience or to some similar experience. So it is, uh, um, you go further and further away from the experience itself. And whatever words you use, whatever description you use, it is based on your background. And language is, uh, uh, determined by your culture, your religion, your tradition, et cetera. 

And that is the whole problem, you know, this memory… Remembering the experience… In which terms do you remember the experience? And this is the very question which is discussed here. And that’s why, the moment you, um, identify an experience as an experience of emptiness, then the criticism is rightly applied that, uh, how can you, uh… A remembered emptiness is not emptiness, but it can point the way. But it can point the way. Yeah, language can point the way. Yeah, or the text can… Yeah, but my consciousness… Yeah. Or if my consciousness is shadows… Shadows. So the, um, even… Even void, so long as it is conceived, is verily… Verily knowable; means, it’s an object of knowledge, because of its being delimited in thought. 

See, it’s like saying, “Oh, I was in a state of _nirvikalpa_.” Well, uh, if that _nirvikalpa_ state would have continued, you couldn’t use any words to speak about. But it’s only that when you reach a state of _nirvikalpa_, or something… Yeah, yeah. So the same thing we’ll, uh, we’ll speak about _kuṇḍalinī_, you see. Because all this talking about experience is so dangerous. And that’s why you need a _guru_, you need a, uh, _śāstra_. You need a very clear, uh, guidance. You know, what is authentic? What is not authentic? What is _akṛtima_? What is _kṛtima_? Uh, what is fabricated, you know? There’s so many fabricated, uh, mystical experiences, uh, going around. And, uh… And that’s why these scriptures are very, very, um, useful and helpful.

So then he comes, uh, at the end, when he summarizes his com-… Commentary to this point, this… The Spanda… The Spanda principle cannot be recollected like a void. That can never be said with propriety to be absent, for it is involved uniformly as the experiencer in all the experiences.

And the… Beautifully here, um, he quotes _śruti_, quotes the _Upaniṣad_, and one of the most basic, fundamental, ancient _Upaniṣads_, _Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad_, “How can you know the knower?” “How can the knower be an object of knowledge?” So this is, of course, you have the _Kena Upaniṣad_ and the _Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad_. “How can you know the knower?” Page… Which page? Page 77 in the translation. And the, uh, Sanskrit is on page 73, but I cannot follow the Sanskrit. It would take too much time.

So the state of entry into reality is remembered on account of the impression of _prāṇa_, et cetera, when one comes back to normal consciousness after meditation. The Spanda principle is not similarly remembered. It is rather the highest experience, the quintessence of uninterrupted light and bliss, involved in all experiences… In 70, translation. Two states are spoken about: that is, of the doer, or the subject, and the deed, or the object. Of these two, the deed, or the object, is subject to decay, but the doer, or the subject, is imperishable. In the _samādhi_ of void, only the effort which is directed towards objectivity disappears. It is only a fool who, on the disappearance of that effort, thinks, “I have ceased to be.” There can never be the disappearance of that inner nature which is the abode of the attribute of omniscience in the event of the non-perception of anything objective. And here, it’s again… This is the turning point. “_Nato 'ntarmukhabhāvā sarvajñatvāguṇāspadam_.” What is the basis of omniscience is the state… Perfectly introverted state, “_antarmokhobhavā_.” And this can never be, um, can never disappear. That inner being is the abode of omniscience and every other divine attribute. It can never cease to exist because nothing else can be perceived outside it. Uh, if… If… If also have done a _Vyākaraṇa… Vyākaraṇa_, we’ll remember one… A very important, um, was verses that, “_grahya grāhakasaṃvitti_.” That the consciousness of subject and object is common to all living beings, but the difference of the _yogi_ is that he is aware of the connection of the religion… _Sambandhe sarvadā sthitaḥ_. He is fully aware of the connection. So this is… Here, this is the two states are subject and object. And, um, the difference of the _yogi_ is that he is aware of their connection. And here, a _yogi_ is, of course, one who is in that inner, internalized consciousness, “_antarmokhobhavā_,” which is the substratum, the basis, for omniscience. And this basis… On this internal… Internalized… The being that can never disappear. _Anu bandhinath_. So again it… It discusses the, um, different states in, um, in deep sleep and in, um, in this… For four different states. Um, is it… Is that what he’s referring to, uh, when he says, uh, um, “in the event of the non-perception of anything objective?” “Non-perception of anything objective,” um, well, what state would that be in when there would be nothing objective to perceive? Deep sleep or death? The last sentence in translation maybe… Yeah, deep sleep is one… In the… One level of interpretation, yes. Under the… Under the non-perception of another… That external effort during deep sleep, et cetera, et cetera, means, although it… Many other _tanmātras_ in the _jñāna pāda_ of Shiva concern the moment of the beginning. And we had spoken about this, a description of intensity. Means that the intensity of the beginning of an emotion, beginning of a perception, uh, arising of, um, an experience, and not to go out, but stay with the beginning, and… And to be aware of that beginning at that point. And this is the whole, um, secret of the _ādi anta cautī_. Now let’s come to this commentary because I have said _paśya_ refers to _parama padam_, but he says, uh, it refers to _svabhāva_. _Paśya_ means that inner nature which is the topic of this treatise is _alabdhi_, means uninterrupted… Uninterrupted knowledge. The fully enlightened has, by the firm… 
