Before we continue with the text, uh, two questions or requests. One is, uh, the desire has been heard that we should listen to His Holiness the Dalai Lama again reciting the, uh, *Mahamṛtyuñjaya Mantra*. Some of you have not heard it who came a day later. So we could do that, hopefully. Last time, I'm sorry, the problem was because the *Guru Stotra* was number three and the machine couldn't read that. But this is just one CD, so it worked the first time, so it will work again. So, if this evening, uh, I think evening is a good time, at meditation time. So we we will listen, uh, to this again. 

And the second is somebody, uh, somebody asked me if I have the video of Swamiji which I think last year we showed. Yeah, I didn't bring it. Many of you have seen it. Well, all I have is a CD with pictures, I mean, most of the pictures I published in the book, but if you want, we can, uh, see it on the the computer or on the TV. That that's all I can offer. But you know, you people should all know that Swamiji has teaching on YouTube. What? Swamiji has teaching on YouTube? YouTube? No, in YouTube there are some, uh, clips, some short, um, pieces. Yeah, but if you put them together… No, you put the… Oh, yes, that can be. Yes, yes. You see, I am so untechnical person that I never think of this possibilities. But, um, there are… Yes, yes. Yes, some short clips in YouTube. So if anybody, uh, who is highly technically capable of downloading, then, uh, we we could do it. 

Um, see, the evening meditation we have preponed it, uh, to seven. But we could also have this little *darśan* of Swamiji and then go for meditation half an hour later, so that we end with meditation. It's not good after meditation to come back and… Is that possible? Yes. So that at 7 o'clock we would see, uh, but the technician has to be sure that it works. I'm not good at… We need the machine. We need to change the batteries in that remote. Batteries? Battery changed, but not working? What is not? But it is; a remote is working. This one is, that day it was three records. So, it was not jumping but not… as the technology is saying it's only one, so it it should work ideally. Yeah, one was working but not three. Yeah. So, the control, remote? Yeah, yeah, because, yeah, the remote is working, then you would have jumped from 1 to 3, but there is no button on the player itself. So it was a… So we we have to set our technology right, and so that in the evening we are… But then we will get a copy of what's been recorded now? I am not concerned. You ask the dear Bhagwan. Just ask the dear Bhagwan. 

And the second thing, which I'm already warning you, those who know me, they can already predict what I'm asking you. But, um, I'm already telling you now that for tomorrow, rather day after tomorrow, what is today is fourth? Fourth, fourth? Yeah. So we have one full day tomorrow. But for your own reflection and *sādhana* and meditation, um, you please select one *kārikā* which has struck you, struck you most for your own personal practice or enlightenment. And in in the last round we share what we have discovered. But just concentrate it on one *kārikā*, or even one half *kārikā*. Sometimes half, one line is enough. Uh, so that means also that concentrating our, um, learning and into just… We have started from the idea of *sūtra*, so to condense it in in one *sūtra* which is our personal *sūtra*, which we are carrying with us. 

So the, uh, the question was, many questions were asked regarding, um, the different usages of texts and concepts in Buddhism, which is a very big topic. But just on the question of *sūtra*, because you asked the question, the *sūtra* in the, I would say, the Hindu tradition, because it's not only Kashmir Śaivism. *Sūtra* comes later. First the revealed text, which is either maybe *Veda* or *Upaniṣad* or *tantra*, *āgama*. But *sūtra* even Vyāsa can compose a *sūtra*: *Śrīmad Rāja* is composed *sūtra*. The *Pañcaviṃśatikā* of the is in *sūtras*. So, *sūtra* can be still composed. So it's not a revealed text, except of course the *Śivasūtra*, which is the basic, uh, the basic in between revelation and human authorship. So we can also compose our own *sūtra*, but let us first, uh, absorb the *sūtras* which we have learnt. And as, uh, *Śrīmad Rāja* also calls the *kārikās* very often *sūtras*. 

And within that, if you can tell us something about your timetable on the sixth. Timetable on the sixth? Yes. Actually, uh, yes. Six we have, uh, generally decided that we'll have the morning meditation, we'll have breakfast, and we'll have a concluding session. Now, if somebody is leaving earlier, then he has to give us his *sūtra* before you leave. Don't leave without giving your, uh, discovery. So whoever has to leave earlier, um, that will be time to please share your what you have discovered. So this will be after lunch or before lunch? Then yes. Uh, concluding session, we can take our time and, depending on your timetable of train or bus or whatever. Uh, normally we would leave after lunch, so that after after concluding you can pack and have lunch and have some, uh, talks and then silence will be anyhow, uh, broken on the sixth. And, uh, so you can leave after lunch. Uh, and and I also told Praveen, because there is another group coming on the seventh, so definitely we should, um, leave our rooms on the sixth by the sixth evening, latest. I I think that's what he wanted to announce, so I think it's okay. You know, I think it's okay. He told me that, I think that's what he wanted to say. So I think it is clear. We have two full days and sixth morning we'll have the sharing and… 

Now when, uh, yesterday, the whole topic of *vibhūti*, of the, uh, yogic powers. It started with the question of dreaming. And it's very interesting, because I mean, this again, uh, something which we can relate to our own experience. If you have ever been in the proximity of an enlightened being, or great *yogī*, or *siddha*, or *jīvanmukta*, uh, you would have definitely observed that your sleep and your dream would be of a different quality. At least I can testify to that; I'm sure everybody can, that the the quality of… Now, without going into details, what kind of dreams and so on and so on. But just the the quality of consciousness in sleep, the transparency, the awareness, and then also the dreams would become more and more, uh, transparent and more lucid, and and giving you spiritual messages really. 

And that is, uh, you may call it a *vibhūti*. But these *vibhūtis* are are… See, for somebody who is a a pilot, uh, in a jet plane, of course, the milestones on the road, they are totally insignificant. But for people who are walking, these milestones are also important, because you can see at least some progress. "Now, I have walked for 5 km. Now I walked for 10 km." So, the *vibhūtis* are… Of course, they are disturbing and distracting seen from the highest point of view. But for the pedestrian that we are, walking on the road of enlightenment, these signposts and these signs are also, uh, indications. If you have some important dream or some important experience, they are signs. They are signposts. So, they are… it's always double sided, you know? From the point of view, the highest enlightenment, of course, they are obstacles. But from the point of view of progressing on the path, they are indications. So one should neither completely negate them nor overestimate them. You know, some people overestimate: "Oh, I have seen a great light and this and that and so on." Uh, so it's okay, wonderful, but not to overestimate, because then it becomes an obstacle. The moment you… Especially why does it become an obstacle? Because you attribute it to your own individual ego again: "I have seen that." So again the question which was asked in that *kuṇḍalinī* article: Who are you to see that light? Are you that light? And then you don't talk about it. 

So, that is why the whole topic of *vibhūtis*, which of course, uh, Patañjali gives, uh, in great detail. And of course, as you have mentioned, in the Buddhist scriptures, uh, the the the, uh, *siddhis* of the Buddhist Tantras are given in great detail. Now, if we have any in-between, uh, I said all the time, you know, from *pramātṛ* to *supra-pramātṛ*, from *pramātṛ* to *supra-pramātṛ*. So, in-between, before being established in the *supra-pramātṛ* state, which is really the end station, there is no more progress. Before that, there are many things to be observed and many things to be even practiced. And, uh, I I don't know. For me this states are like, uh, like reading a thriller or reading a fascinating novel, and what next, you know? And, uh, it happens. You know, really, it's it's so, uh, exciting and, uh, what in Hindi we call *romānca*, you know, *romānca*, that that, uh… So what comes *romānca*? When your hair stands on end? He's thinking of romance. Can we be quiet, please? Meditation brings *romānca*. This is a romance with the Lord. Yeah, it is. It is. 

So like you read the, uh, fascinating novel, you sleep, uh, in the evening, and next day you think, "Oh, where are those…? It continue…" So, actually, the last verse was regarding, um, depression. And now we are coming to verse nine. Now you will again discover that the *maṅgalācaraśanam eṣaṇameṣa jāpyam*. It contains much more than, uh, just a cosmic, uh, *śakticakra* and everything. But what means this *unmeṣa* that comes now? *Unmeṣa* in the sense of awakening. And because all these terms, you know, depending on the context. Like *nimeṣa* we had: the two sections, *nimilana samādhi* and *unmilana samādhi*. *Nimilana samādhi* corresponds to *nimeṣa*, and *unmilana samādhi* to *unmeṣa*. See, the the the, um, introversion and the opening to the universal, um, consciousness. So they also correspond to *nimeṣa* and *unmeṣa*. 

Now he comes to *unmeṣa*.  In reply to the query, "What is the nature of this *unmeṣa*, and by what means is it available?", Utpaladeva says—and this obviously concerns the *Prabuddha*, not the *Suprabuddha*. He doesn't need any more. And this again brings us to a practice which concerns us. 

> *ekacintāprasaktasya yataḥ syāt aparodhayā
unmeṣas tad vijñeyaḥ svayam tam upalakṣayet
tad śobhā-bralīyatā tadāsyāḥ paramaṃ padam*

So, *śobhā*, we are agitated, so we are in movement, but that's not that movement. It's not the stillness of the dead body. But it is stillness in movement and movement in stillness. And this is such a beautiful definition. And of course, if you… I mean I convinced this, uh, sorry, stupid publisher—he had put all… he puts all kinds of things on the cover. And I said, "Why don't you put a Nataraja, for heaven's sake?" Then because he goes and reprinting, reprinting, and putting some other design, you know, make it very colorful and all. So at least a Nataraja image is an image of that stillness in movement and movement in stillness, if if you make it a visualization. Because he is very much centered. And his face is totally still. And yet there is total movement. So, if you want to visualize it, this is the visual, uh… 

Okay, let us come to the commentary on this, uh, *kārikā*. Could you just say a little more about Nataraj and stillness and movement and movement and…? 

Well, it doesn't come here. It is just because Śaivism is one unity. So, um, of course, if… I'm not… larger images all over the place. We have seen it in Amarchellum, from north to south, and, uh, east to west, uh, so it's a very universal, um, image. And, um, but, uh, it is not explained in our text. There is a Kumaraswami book in the library. Huh? There is Kumaraswami book in the library. There's…? Yeah, yeah, the *Dance of Śhiva*, by Kumaraswami. Uh, it's only one aspect; it's also not, uh, not sufficient. But I mean, the the important thing theologically is that Nataraja represents the five acts of Śiva. And that you can read in Kumaraswami. Yeah. 

Now here, Śemarāja has very beautiful explanation of the two levels of… What does it mean, um, *aparā eva udaya*? The rising of another. So, first he quotes the beginning by what they have seen: "In accordance with this view, there is the rise of another, that is, there is the manifestation of another superb transcendental awareness, which is full of the bliss of consciousness." So this is the second level of interpretation. Not of another object, of another thought. But another here means… Now those who can read Sanskrit, *cintyāyāṃ* uh… *ityartha prasaktasya eka ekāgrībhūtasyo yogino*. So, the the condition is, first, the *yogin* has to be one-pointed, *ekāgrībhūtasya yoginaḥ*. His mind has to be absolutely one-pointed. *iti tathā ekāgratā prakāśa ullasat sambhit sphāra sambhit sphāratāḥ tad ālambana nimīlana nimīlana ut*… um… *nimīlana nimīlanāt caṭiti krasta samasta cintā sant santateḥ agni-somā*. Now he has split it into several… Śemarāja is hopeless, because he makes one sentence over five, six lines! And the one compound, uh, which goes over the whole line. So you have to split it. *sambhit sphāra*. So, what, uh, you said before, um, those… if… *sambhit sphāra*, see, it's the expansion of pure consciousness. *sphāra* is also one of these, uh, like *vikāśa*, but it's more powerful than *vikāśa*. *sphāra* is the sudden opening, sudden opening of, um, some pure consciousness. Okay, uh, translate… has split it into the different… "In accordance with this view, there is the rise of another…" Yeah, "that is, the manifestation of another superb transcendental awareness, which is full of the bliss of consciousness." *cit-camatkārātmā eva lokottara ullāsa syāt*. We have seen that *ullāsa*, uh, *ullāsa* is also one, uh, synonym of *spanda*, expansion. *cit-camatkāra*, the the the wonderful surprise of consciousness, *lokottara*. That perhaps you are asking, "What is transcendental?" "In whom does it arise?" It arises in the *yogī* who is deeply engrossed, deeply concentrated in one thought, who is one-pointed, *ekasyāṃ cintyāyāṃ prasaktasya ekā*. And of course, *eka-cittatā-praśaṃktā* means he has already some… a lot of experience. Otherwise, it's not possible to stay with one thought. Stay with one thought. 

So that one-pointedness is the condition. It's not again, it's not an effort. Because everything which is effort, it it it grasps, you know? It is something which takes hold of something, but it is not that. It has to let it be. Let it happen. And for letting it happen, you have to let it go. You have to let loose. But it's it's both: utmost one-pointedness, and then letting—*acittatī*—suddenly, without any putting in your effort. Of course, the normal interpretation of this verse is, uh, what we have seen in the in other *tāṇas*, of the Upani- of the Vedānta-vāda, that, um, what he says in the end: "in the mind of a person who is deeply engrossed in thinking of one object, that from which another thought arises, and which pervades both the thoughts as *samuccaya*." That's another understanding. 

Okay, then, uh, now he comes to… See the the the relationship between *vibhūti*, as supernormal or yogic powers or *siddhis*, and experiences which happen on the way. They're very closely related, because, um, sometimes, I mean, the the *siddhis* are just things which happen or which, um, the *yogī* experiences, and then he can apply it, um, and this is what many, unfortunately, do today. They they manipulate with that. It's like you have some technical power, and then you you manipulate it, and, uh, that's the negative, uh, side of *siddhis*. But the positive side, as I said in the beginning, is that they are signs on the road, signposts. And, uh, the next, um, *kārikā* speaks of experiences that the *yogī* has. 

So the introductory, uh, sentence now: The author exhorts that the great *yogī* should regard those various supernormal powers as rejectable, which arise from the practice of *unmeṣa*, and which even inferior *yogīs* can acquire with effort. So, *vibhūti* is a question of no effort. Martina, I can't find the the Note Three, page 144.  Yeah. It's here. Yes, but he says he should know and he should, um, seek, and he sho- and he should neither… *vijñātavya*… No, no, sorry. It's neither in the sense of the object. It's, uh, *arartaṃ saṃkhyātaṃ*. It should be non- no… recognized. In the two meanings. Nothing is not… nothing very… I mean, because he uses two expressions: *vijñātavya* and *anveṣanīya*. So, he has to explain why does he use two expressions. *vijñātavya*: it has to be recognized, and has to be sought after. It's just to stress… I I don't think that's so much of difference. Well, I I'm not ab- absolutely certain. And of course, uh, it… I mean, if, um, it can be connected definitely with recognition, this *prativijñā*. So it has to be recognized, um…  Not the same word as used, but it it means it has to be, uh, recognized. 

Okay, then, uh, now, uh, uh, *kārikā* 10:

> *ato bindur bindur ato nādaḥ rūpaṃ asmāt ato rasaḥ
pravartante acireṇaiva kṣobhakatvenā dehinaḥ*

Now, since the *yogī* is still attached—I mean, he lives in the body—so, it is unavoidable that there are some bodily experiences or, uh, expressions to that, uh, consciousness, which is the pure *unmeṣa*, pure *spanda*, pure *unmeṣa*. But it takes certain expressions, of the… certain forms to be experienced. And here the whole topic… Once I had a seminar which was one of my my most beautiful seminars on the spiritual senses. Inner spiritual sense in different traditions. Uh, it was really wonderful, because you find it in all the tradition, all the mystical traditions. 

So, what are the experiences which happen to the *yogī* on on his, uh, way? So, there are experiences… No. *Bindu* and *bindu*, they make a subtle difference. Um, *indu* and *bindu* are… I… A *bindu* is more used in the, uh, sense of the spiritual light. Then there is *bindu*, then there is *nāda*, there is *rūpa*, and there is *rasaḥ*. So, there is an experience of supernatural light—and this *bindu* or *bindu*, it's mostly experienced in the *bhūmadyā*, between the eyebrows, the place between the eyebrows. It's never called *ājñā cakra* in our texts. This, um…  No, I have never found it. Always *bhūmadya*. Then there is, uh, an experience of the internal sound. Then there is an experience of a vision, *rūpa*, and the experience of, uh, supremely divine taste, *rasaḥ*. 

So, *rūpa* is form. *Rūpa* means form, that means vision. *Rūpadeti*? Huh? Form of a deity. But it doesn't say anything. Doesn't say. Doesn't say. But how do you know it's divine, then? Well, you will know it. From this… So, 'taḥ athaḥ, from this means from this previous… previously described experience, arises. 

Now he is right to put in brackets: supernormal light, supernormal sound, supernormal form, supernormal taste, "in a short time," *acireṇa*, "to the *yogī* who has not yet done away with the identification of the self with the body, which however, only a disturbing factor." Here *kṣobha* is again used. Now, uh, it's that that stage where the *yogī*, though he has already experienced that pure consciousness, that pure *spanda*, pure *unmeṣa*, but since he's still in the body, then certain… these experiences occur, which is quite natural. I mean, supernaturally natural, anyway. And this… the tradition has—especially *bindu* and *nāda* are are very much in the, uh, tradition that, um, the experience of the light point and of the internal sound, the *anahata-nāda*, the unstruck sound, means not produced sound. And then *rūpa*, the, uh, vision, um, and *rasaḥ*, uh, very, uh, sweet, divine ambrosia. We had this *amṛta*, no? Ambrosial taste, like sometimes you had a beautiful expression, then you become nectarized. The *rasaḥ*. Yeah. But yeah, I don't understand why, uh, Liam, she says in the note here that, uh, here *sparśa*, the touch, is not mentioned, because *sparśa* kind of become an obstacle. 

Yeah, because we had before, *sparśa* is identical with the *śakti*. So, *sparśa* is, um… So here is a very highly spiritual sense. Touch, the sense of touch, is totally, uh, identified with *śakti*. But at that that level, it can be an obstacle, like still being in touch with a certain body, or any *prāṇa*, or no? It can be… No, um, *sparśa* is that *antara-sparśa*, the spiritual sense of *sparśa*, is the highest. And that's why it is not counted among the limitations. It happens. It it is, of course, it's an experience, but it is the highest of all the spiritual senses. And, um, do you know that expression, "syn- synesthetic"? Yeah. Synesthetic. Where, uh, many spiritual people, they experience… senses are mixed up, uh, you know? And you find it in the mystical literature very… for example, very often, that, um, you know, um, hearing forms, and smelling, uh, tastes, and, uh, so all the senses getting, um, mixed up. It's called synesthetic, synesthetic. Maybe it happens in abnormal people, but, um, also in, uh, synes- synesthetic… people is not the form in, uh, in in in mystics, it does. A lot of poets mentioned in poems. Poets, of course. But poets are very close to the mystics. Yeah. Expressions together. 

Now, one text which comes to my mind is, um, um, Ganeśvarī here, *Amṛtānubhava*. There an experience he makes of *amṛta*, where he has a whole chapter of all the senses getting, uh, one in place of the other. So, perceiving with one sense the object of another sense. And this is a very high state. And it's not a hallucination. That's it for artists. No, it's not important. It's just it's just happening, but it's not important. It doesn't lead to any… anywhere. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, but it is a perception, a different way of perceiving, no? Yeah. It's okay. For example, a triangle is yellow, and it's very sour, and it's it's very high in in the the no- noise. It's high sound, some- sounding. Sounding, yeah. Something like that. No, but what's the difference, then, between this and a hallucination? Uh, the work you put…  But it… Between an experience where perceptions and senses are mixed up, a vision, how is it different from a hallucination? Of course, it's all a question… See, the the whole point in this, uh, in any spiritual tradition is, you have to learn to distinguish levels of consciousness. You cannot say what an, um, uh, ordinary consciousness experiences is exactly the same what a what a liberated *yogī* experiences. So, unless you can,  distinguish, uh, and in your own own experience, what is a very ordinary or very confusing experience, and what is very high level of consciousness. So I think this developing that sense of *viveka*, where he said to to discriminate, um, between levels of consciousness, otherwise we we we put everything in the one, uh, pot and, uh… We cannot see those stages of, um, higher consciousness. 

Here, it is a state in-between. The one that *Spanda*, or vibration, has already been experienced in its pure way of pure consciousness, but since we are still in the body, we experience that in certain sense perceptions, but which are not the ordinary senses, which are spiritual senses. So that means the appearance of light in between the eyebrows, or this hearing that eternal sound, and, uh, now, *arūpa*, having a vision. Now, because you see divine, uh, figures… it is not at all necessary. I give you an example from a completely different tradition: Saint Benedict, the founder of the Benedictine, of the monasticism, in, uh, in the West in the 5th century. He was living as a hermit in a cave in Subiaco, near Rome. And one day he was deeply immersed in his *sādhana*. When they… he was looking out of his window, and he saw the whole universe, that he had a vision of the whole universe in one divine light. And this vision you can find in other saints also, in in other traditions. But I mean that was nothing… you know, he was a Christian; he would see Christ. Nothing to do with any form, you know, but just the vision of the totality in that consciousness, in that light, pure light. And that is the *arūpa*. It it's not, uh, any particular form of the deity or anything at all. And this… 

So, he gives, um, in the description which is well-known, actually. The the… from the *dhyāna* which is being practiced, appear in a short term experiences like the light of a star in the middle of the two eyebrows… Which is a generic light, expressive of the entire objective world. Exactly what I said about Saint Benedict. It's not a particular light. *asheṣāvedya samānya prakāśātma*. Not… it's not the low level of, uh, hallucination. So, "the light illuminating the entire objective world." *asheṣāvedya samānya* um *prakāśātma*. So it's, uh, concentrated in that point between the eyebrows. So, it will come… it is meaning… And the same with *nāda*. *nāda*: *sakala vācaka avibhedita shabda rūpa anāhata dhvanirūpa*… so beautiful expression. "It is in the form of that subtle sound which is unstruck," *anāhata dhvanirūpa*. "And which contains *sakala vācaka vibhedita vibhedi shabdanā*." So, all the sounds, all the words, um, which are, um, uh, possible to be expressed. So, sound which is unstruck, which is generic sound, representing all undifferentiated words. So it means the source of sound, the source of word, language. It's not just… you know, sometimes we we make these experiences, "Something… look, very, uh psychic, you know? Okay, you hear some sound, and then you see some light…" and so… But it is the whole… the source of all the sounds of the universe that you hear. This is tremendous! So that's why, identifying sometimes, some… yeah, some clue, "Something is going on inside…" and so… But one has to be very careful in identifying these experiences. It said that *anāhata dhvani* which contains, because it's the the origin of all the sounds, is undifferentiated sound. At the moment, we have seen this: *paśyantī*, *madhyamā*, and *vaikharī*. So at the level of the undifferentiation, *paśyantī*, of course, not *parā*, because *parā* wouldn't have any manifestation. But at the level of *paśyantī*, um, where all the sounds, all the languages are contained in in the primordial form. 

"And *arūpa* form, vision." "And *akāre api prakāshanam tejahā*." This, uh, form is that brightness which shines even in darkness. Now, because sometimes we prefer to have some examples. Now, uh, you live in Tiruvannamalai; there's example, a beautiful example of the life of Ramana Maharshi. When Ramana had his great enlightenment experience, and he was walking up to, um, Tiruvannamalai, and he had to stop the night in a temple in Tirukoilur—you know that story, no? And he was totally exhausted, and was lying down in the temple, and it was dark; it was already dark. And suddenly he saw, uh, a fire light in, uh, enlightening the whole temple! And he was… he was a child, he was 16, and he was confused. He was looking, "Where is the source of that light?" So he went all around the temple. There was no light! So, this kind of, uh, experience is meant here. So that there is no source, but it shines even in darkness. 

*Tejas*. Now, *tejas* is again such a beautiful word, right from the *Vedas* and *Upaniṣads*. It's that fiery brightness, uh, which is an inner glow also. 

"And *rasa*: *rasanāgre lokottharāsvāda*." Very, very explicitly, it's, um, "transcendental taste is experienced on the tip of the tongue." 

Now, all these experiences, although they are of very high, uh, nature, they give only temporary satisfaction, *santoṣa*. So you have that wonderful… any one of these wonderful experiences, but they don't last. They don't last. So you may remember then, "It's… I had this fantastic, uh, vision of light, or that *nāda*, inner sound," and so on. But they are only temporary. They are temporary; give you temporary satisfaction. So, they don't lead you to that permanent state. 

And, uh, with a view to the completely enlightened *yogī*, they are disturbing. Disturbing factors. Indeed positive obstacle in the realization of the *Spanda* principle. "Because *vighnabhūtā kṣobhakatvena*." Because they create a kind of, um, *kṣobha*. Now we had this word *kṣobha* in a more purely psychological sense, but here it's *kṣobha* in the spiritual sense. Even, uh, spiritual experiences cause a kind of disturbance, because you are excited about it. And, uh, anybody who doesn't have so much, uh, experience, gets very excited when such a thing happens. So, that is *kṣobha*. And then it becomes an obstacle. So, things which are a sign, which are an indication of your progress—in a way it's true—but the same things become an obstacle. 

So… So I think, I mean, the text is so brief, but at the same time, so precise also. And of course, he quotes Patañjali's *Yogasūtra*. Of course there's a lot to be quoted from the *Yogasūtra* about *vibhūti*, but he quotes just that one sentence. Um, "These are obstacles in the way of meditation, and they are regarded as occult powers in *vyutthāna*. They are *siddhis* in *vyutthāna*, but in *samādhi* they are obstacles." But this is a very clear, uh, definition that Abhinavagupta gives. So, in in the ordinary state, if suddenly you see light and hear, then it it's something extraordinary, wonderful, uh, and, uh, powerful, and so on. But for *samādhi*, they are obstacles. That… there is something to rejoice on or to, uh, get, uh, caught into those… is the obstacle. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. 

Well, I'm… I… I suppose that everybody has read Patañjali's *Yogasūtra*, and you know that chapter on the *vibhūti* yoga. So, uh, we are… the different, um, powers are described, out of which *saṃyama*, on which, um, object, which kind of *siddhi*, uh, accrues, etc., etc. 

Okay. Then I think I'll… we do one more. Yes, um… Before you used the word "primordial." Yeah. What Sanskrit word would you use for "primordial"? *Ādi*. *Ādi*. Just *ādi*. *Ādi*, um, um, and it it is also used, um, not here in in this commentary, but *nāda sakala vācaka avibhedita shabdanā rūpa anāhata anāhata dhvani rūpa*. So, this… it refers to *ādi*, that original sound. And especially in Kashmir Shaivism, you have that very developed theory of sound, and, uh, word, and *vāk*, and so on, so that…  And and, could you… you said very quickly the name…for the this chapter in this tradition, that… It is the…?  Repeat the name for it. This is the place for, uh, experiencing *bindu*, and that light. Yeah, yeah, the name for the chapter. It's always called *bhrumadhya*. *Bhrumadhya*, *bhrumadhya*: the center between the eyebrows. Just descriptive. It's not *ājñā*. I I have not found any, uh, the *ājñā cakra* in our text. I don't think so. 

So, we take one more *kārikā*. Now the author says that the *yogī* who sinks his psychophysical self in the real nature, which is *unmeṣa*, experiences the state of the highest experience in the form of that *unmeṣa*. It's a beautiful expression. 

> *atha unmeṣātmanā svabhāve dehapramatṛtām nimajjati*

Who who merges or sinks… 

> *tadākāram api parapramatṛtām labhate*. 

Now, *dehapramatṛtām* means a very clear distinction between the subjectivity, which is still bound to the psychosomatic, um, uh, existence. *dehapramatṛ* means, uh, the subtle body: still identification with the body, the mind, the senses, etc. But that has to be merged in the supreme *pramatṛ*, *parapramatṛ*. 

> *tritṛkṣayeva sarvārthān yathā vyāpyā vyāpyā avatiṣṭhate*
*tathā kiṃ bahunoktenā svayam evāvavabhūchate*

So, he… he cannot be… Then, comes to the same point: You have to experience it yourself. How much can I explain? Now, firstly: "When the *yogī*, wishing to see all objects, abides in that state, pervading them all"—that is, infusing them all with the light of his consciousness, of course; that is, um, to be put in bracket—"Then what is the use of saying much? He will experience it for himself." Now, there is a desire, the *dṛkṣā*, the desire to see all objects, to see the entire reality. *vyāpyāt avatiṣṭhate*, the pervasive vision. *avatiṣṭhate*, that is he… he is established, he, um, he, um, abides. So, this… that universal, uh, vision, and, uh, vision which means, uh, pervasion, pervasion, *vyāpti*, *vyāpti*. What is this… Silverman, you always keep Silverman to yourself and don't tell us. Yes. What is…? Only the words, but she has the commentary. These… only the verses, the verses. I know. I don't call it… Okay, there's no commentary on it. Yeah, *avatiṣṭhate*. Okay. Yeah. Okay. 

So, this… that universal, uh, vision and, uh, vision which means, uh, pervasion, pervasion, *vyāpti*, *vyāpti*. 

What is this…? Silverman, you always keep Silverman to yourself and don't tell us. Yes. What is…? Only the words, but she has the commentary. These only the verses, the verses, I know… I don't call it… Okay, there's no commentary on it? Yeah. *avatiṣṭhate*. Okay. Yeah. 

Yeah, uh, the… her translation is better here, because this *avatiṣṭhate*, she takes it in a stronger sense. She says, "He who remains immobilized," or "im- immobilized, diffusing, uh, the the consciousness in all things as at the moment when one has the desire to see…" So, this is more, um, more precise than what we have seen here. We have something similar in the *Vijñānabhairava*, there, where it's a question of one… one… some experience, and then to remain immobilized there, to remain… just stop… stopped, uh, the… to to remain, um, *avatiṣṭhate*. Now, uh, he… here she is much better… Everywhere! Huh? Everywhere. She's much better. Everywhere. And not always, but, um… 

So, "Who remains immobilized, diffusing consciousness in all things as at the moment when one has the desire to see…" Then… dot, dot, dot… "Experience it for yourself." She has made dot, dot, dot! Now, this is very important, very precise, because what she says is, then: Do it yourself. You remember the three *śaktis*: *icchā*, *jñāna*, *kriyā*. So, the first thing in any perception is there is some movement towards, and that is *icchāśakti*. And that is wanting to perceive something or to experience something; that is… And then, to immobilize the mind there, and make it pervasive. So, it's a very subtle, um, experience. And that, um… She… Maharaja connects it with the level of *paśyantī*. Now, *paśyantī*, the, um, visionary word which is at the level of not yet expressed, not yet objectified. And not to go down to *madhyamā* and *vaikharī*, but to stay at that level of… and that is where this is, of course, the city of that universal vision. So when *paśyantī* becomes universalized. And it's not just the moment in the descent of consciousness, down to the, uh, objective, uh, thing. And only at that level can there be pervasion, *vyāpti*, this pervasiveness. It's not… but the moment you come down to *madhyamā*, it's finished. You cannot be pervasive anymore, because you are already at the level of thought, and not to talk of *vaikharī*, which is any old level of *vikalpa*, um… So, um… Okay, then, um, She… Maharaja… "Just as at the time of the desire to see, by means of indeterminate perception—" *paśyantī rūpa avik- alpaka dṛkṣā avasāyi*… See, there are two ways of wanting, desiring to see. One is *savikalpaka*, and the other is *nirvikalpaka*. Means: "without thought," before the arising of thought. "In the case of *paśyantī*, the object desired to be seen gains internally in an identical form—" *sphuran tī tathā eva svacchandātī atvā atvā prakriyā uktān*, etc., etc., etc… Very long, long, long sentence! "Even so, when the *yogī* abides pervading all the objects, from the earth right up to Śiva, as described in *Svacchandatantra* and other works, in the chapter dealing with the way of the world—" *svabhāvanā*, *svabhāvanā*—"that is to say, infusing everything with [i]consciousness, like Sadāśiva, with the thought of 'I,' to begin with, relating everything, and finally with thought-free awareness, embracing everything within himself, then he will experience that for himself which is the result, the bliss of absorption into the state of the highest experience." So he has made the sentence as long as Kṣemarāja's! Uh, "That swallows up all objective phenomena by the consciousness that blossoms out of the unification of all objectivity." Full stop. "As *esa vedya aikīkaraṇena unmiṣat*…" See, of unifying all objectivity, making them one. And this is that kind of, uh, vision which is referred to. And this swallowing up is again, that's a very, uh, powerful expression. So, that city, if you call it a city, is that total unification of all objectivity in that innermost fundamental consciousness, *svasaṃvit evā anubhaviṣyati svasaṃviddhi*, in one's own innermost consciousness. And the condition is *yadā avatiṣṭhate* means "he immobilizes" or "he abides," means when he does not swerve from the perfect accomplishment of meditation. So where is that Sanskrit? *yadā avatiṣṭhate asya samāpatyā na vicalati*. If he does not get distracted from the perfect *samāpatti*. Now again, *samāpatti* is the term of Patañjali Yoga, which means the, uh, um, the unification of consciousness. It… it… Silverman… Silverman tells me is *à l'unisson*, means unification. See, what more can be said about this? One has to experience it oneself. Okay, so let's stop. 

What does that have to do with the cities? Huh? What does that part have to do with the cities? Which one? This last part. That doesn't have to do with the cities. It seems very… It seems beyond cities. But the last, uh… Yeah, but this this last, um, of the 11th verse seems to come from beyond the discussion of the city. It seems to be talking about the the realized state, and not a particular city. Um, but he doesn't say, actually, here, that it is… he doesn't call it a city, but it's the the higher experience. He… he has started from the experience of this, uh, divine or divinized spiritual senses: *vindanātha*, uh, *gru*, *rasa*. And this is the highest stage. The the same, at at the highest stage where he doesn't say this is an obstacle. And he also doesn't say it's a city. Yes. It's… It's, uh… it's not the city; it's an accomplishment. I mean, city also means accomplishment, but not as an obstacle. It… it is the achievement of the highest *yogī*. Yeah, I was just wondering why it was following on from a discussion of cities when it was still considered a city, this… this state. But here you have to describe the difference now, between, um, the the the lower levels and the higher level. And it, uh… and that sense, it becomes very clear that this is definitely not an obstacle; it's the highest accomplishment. Yeah.
