Good morning!

Please open page six in your booklet. *Virūpāmabhayapradobhavabhayaḥ*. 

First, we’ll do it alone. Second time, you all join.

*Virūpāmabhayapradobhavabhayaḥ*

*krandasyaitustato riddhāṁ nipatitāśca vīravṛucāṁ*

*īśāntakasyāntakaḥ vīraṁ vāyātiyaḥ svayogīnivṛhaḥ*

*tasya prabhurbhairavo viśvasmimbharaṇādhikṛdvijayate vijñānarūpaḥparaḥ*

*Virūpāmabhayapradobhavabhayaḥ*

*krandasyaitustato riddhāṁ nipatitāśca vīravṛucāṁ*

*īśāntakasyāntakaḥ vīraṁ vāyātiyaḥ svayogīnivṛhaḥ*

*tasya prabhurbhairavo viśvasmimbharaṇādhikṛdvijayate vijñānarūpaḥparaḥ* 

Now every day we will start with the maṅgala śloka of the particular text which we are studying this morning. So this is *Vijñāna Bhairava*. But before we can start with the text, there are few preliminary uh things to be discussed so that, because today is the first really full day, so that we have to settle in without having any confusion about the time and the program and so on. So once we are clear about the whole program, then we don’t need to discuss it again.

One uh is the question of silence. Now I have already seen that some of you have uh taken very seriously my suggestion to keep the whole retreat retreat in silence. I find it wonderful. You will contribute to that atmosphere of maintaining that stillness throughout. Now um I would suggest the few suggestions from uh Acārya-ji also that those who want to have their lunch also in silence, they should sit inside because the others, they can sit outside and talk. Dinner, in any case, is silent. So then we are clear and nobody will disturb uh each other. And also about the meditation time: the time given on the program is minimum – it’s a minimum time. I have already seen this morning, of course, there are many who want to sit longer than forty-five minutes. So, you can start earlier in the morning and sit longer in the evening. And uh so I, I have the key only I have to open; I think five-thirty would be sufficient to open the meditation hall. And in the evening, as long as you want to sit until nine o’clock is no problem. And daytime, of course, the program is more tight. 

Then, Acārya-ji has some suggestion. We have uh one is that uh those who want to eat in silence during the lunch we’d be putting the label, the silent table. So I think uh they can sit there. Now the second uh uh suggestion is that we have in the afternoon tea from three-thirty to four and then you have four to five, the self-study. Now, based on the experience in the past, the self-study we want to convert into the group discussion. We have more than fifty people. We are going to have a group of about ten to twelve. And uh some of the senior students of uh Vedāntī-ji, they will give a review of what she has taught in the forenoon, and then on that you can have a discussion, so that the concept is very clear. Okay? Is there? Okay. Yeah, because uh we found that that group discussion is always very, very useful because it’s a more lively, informal. Right. 

And then, Matthias. Now we are coming to our topic. And you will– those of you who are students of Buddhism – will discover there are lots of connections, and uh both the terms *māyā* and *śūnya* are very central in Hinduism and in Buddhism. And in Buddhism, of course, they have become more philosophical concepts. And in Shaivism, they have remained within the sphere of spirituality and experience. There is no such uh nothing substantial either about *māyā* or *śūnya*. They are terms of experience and of uh practice. 

And uh so it’s good to have a little basis uh from Sanskrit. Both *māyā* and *śūnya*– and *māyā-mā* is the superlative of *māyā*– are adjectives. Means they qualify something. And then only a secondary, they they become nouns. In uh in our system it becomes *māyāṁ* is a noun, the center. And of course Buddhism has all this *māyāmakā* and uh so *māyā-mā* plays a very central role. So, when *māyā* qualifies something, it’s like *madhya-bindu*, the center point; *madhya-rekhā*, central line; *madhya-deśa*, central space. And for our practice for yoga, *madhya-nādī*, the central channel. 

Now, the implications of *māyā* are: It is the in-between. The in-between two things. And it’s– well you can have, of course, uh center in space and time and so on, but it’s not meant in that sense– spatial and temporal. But it is the in-between two things which can be two opposites, or two complementary to uh a duality of two things. And then, the attaining the *māyā* in the center means to overcome that duality. And this is the whole answer is giving you a kind of guideline for whatever is going to follow. We have to– the whole practice is directed at overcoming dualities, overcoming uh contradictions, overcoming uh dichotomies. 

And uh that is a practical way actually, this yoga. A practical way of *Advaita*. See, non-duality is not just a concept; it is a living practice. So, non-duality means overcoming all the dualities in which we normally live. So, the whole practice should lead us to a state of non-duality, to a state of being centered. And that is also– sorry my voice is not very clear.

We have– We usually talk about concentration. Now, concentration is something which you do with the mind or with uh the will. Now, “I have to concentrate on my studies. I have to concentrate on this practice or that practice.” So, concentration– there is a subject and there is an object. Then the other less dualistic way is to centering. And we have given this title of the uh English title of the *Vijñāna Bhairava*: “*Bhairava* Centering Awareness.” So, centering– there is also an activity, there is a movement, there is a uh direction, something active, but not with the will, not with the mind. Centering is– that's by awareness. Centering is a practice of awareness. And then, the end result will be being centered. 

And then uh being centered, of course, our goal, our aim, is to attain that centering be- be centered, not only in our meditation but also in our daily activities. We will have that many of the texts will tell us that. So that practice of centering will lead us to a state of being centered. And I think all of you may have an experience: If you met a very enlightened person, the high lamas or uh Śrī Muktānanda or uh some other, you will immediately feel that there is somebody who is completely centered. And that feeling will communicate to you. See, if you’re in the presence of uh the Dalai Lama or of uh Śrī Ramaṇa Maharṣi or my Guru Swami Lakshman Joo, by being in their presence, you immediately feel centered. So, it’s a kind of contagious uh contagious centering. So, that is what we are aiming at: being that centered being which radiates also that centering. First, we have to be it in ourselves, and then we can radiate uh to others.

So, this is an with clarification also of the the terminology, the language we use, and the the aim we have in this practice. So, this is something very universal. It doesn’t matter to which tradition you belong. We have to do that in our life in any case, whether professionally or in a family relationships and uh so it, it does not limit– is not limited to any religion or any particular tradition. It is a practice and an experience which we do need very badly because as as we as yesterday, the whole uh world is living in duality. We always have this, and that’s why tensions, then they go on increasing, increasing, and the basic duality is subject-object: “Here am I; here you are; here something else.” So, overcoming that duality is the basis of this practice of *mātra*. And of course, the latest the last stage is to be established in the center. 

So, we may have wonderful sensory experiences during meditation, in *samādhi*, or when we go to nature and we are overwhelmed by something beautiful. So, we may have those experiences, but the ideal is to become established in that– in those experiences which may be temporary, but then to make them more and more part of our whole consciousness. 

So, this is the whole background of these days which we are starting today. And then the best or most wonderful text teaching us this centering is *Vijnānabhairava*. And I’ve taken the whole title of *mātra*, as I said yesterday, from *Vijnānabhairava* and from *Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya*, “The Heart of Recognition”. 

So, what does it come back to our Maṅgalaśloka? First of all, who is *Bhairava*? Who or what is *Bhairava*? So, here we have a beautiful uh invocation of *Bhairava*, telling you who, who he is.

> Glorious is the Supreme, whose nature is consciousness, who bestows fearlessness to the fearful, and hence is the cause of overcoming the fear of those afflicted by worldly existence. 

This is a play– a wordplay with *bhaya*– *bhaya*, fear– and *Bhairava*, the name. It’s always uh an indication of overcoming of fear. 

> Who is revealed in the innermost abode of the heart? 

*Hṛtpadmādhyapatistasya vibhavaḥ īśo’ntakasya antakaḥ*. 

The Lord of the fearful, the ender of death. *Antakasya antakaḥ* is so beautiful because in Sanskrit, you know, you can play with words. *Antaka*, the ender, is death, and he is the ender of the ender. *Antakasya antakaḥ*. So, he ends death. He overcomes death. 

> Who removes fear along with his own energy? 

Now, here energy, it is not *śakti* is not said, but *svāyogine*. *Yogine* is of course– the highest *śakti* is also *yogini*. And then, *yoginīs* are also of a semi-divine nature, and then we have also human *yoginīs* who are the female counterpart of the *siddhas*, of the perfect uh beings, etc. So, here *svāyoginīs* is quite beautiful because Śiva is never without *śakti*– with his *yoginī*. 

> Lord Bhairava, who fills the whole universe– which was unmanifest– with his own light of consciousness. 

And this is again a kind of etymology of *Bhairava*. *Parāṇā*, the the filling, he fills the whole universe. He is the one who fills the whole universe. 

And because this is, of course, indication to the text, *Vijnānabhairava*, and *vijñāna*– don't confuse it with the Hindi meaning of *vijñāna*. Of course, there’s some connection, but uh *vijñāna* here means mystical knowledge. It means spiritual knowledge, not science. And the title *vijñānabhairava* is then the *Bhairava* who is consciousness or the *Bhairava* consciousness. So there different ways of uh the divine consciousness or identifying divine consciousness here. So, *vijñānabhairava*. So, the aim or purpose of the whole text is to attain that divine consciousness and to be one with that divine consciousness.

Now I don’t know– many of you may have already read the text or practiced with it and uh so, but still I assume that some of you have not uh uh done it. So, I give you, like with every text I give some introduction to the text as such, and then we go to the specific verses or parts of the text or *mātra*. So, *Vijnānabhairava* is one of the most authoritative ancient tantras in the Kashmir Śaivism tradition. And it is at least one text which has received uh a lot of popularity in recent times because many uh commentaries and translations have been published on this. Many other texts, like *Netra Tantra*– mine is the first translation, then other tantras, but *Netra Tantra* is not at all translated. But *Vijnānabhairava*, it is– you have, you have uh a number of commentaries. More or less correct or not so correct. So, I am using, of course, Maheśvarānanda’s commentary with my own translation of the verses. And then, Jaideva Singh– Jaideva Singh uh the the picture changes, but the title doesn’t change. Um we can use both of these and compare.

Now, the the text is quite unique even in the whole um tantric literature. Tantric literature is very rich, and uh in Shaivism also we have uh many tantras which are equally authoritative in South India, in *Krama tantra*, and others which are non-dualistic, they uh specific- specifically uh authoritative in Kashmir Shaivism. And *Vijnānabhairava* is the most authoritative in the field of spiritual experience. Now, here I cannot use the word yoga, because the word yoga does not come in the whole text. So, yoga comes very much in *Netra Tantra*, but uh here it is not yoga. So, it is *vijñāna*. I mean it is a experience of that divine consciousness. And the beauty of those tantras is they are revealed in the form of dialogue between Śiva and *Śakti*. Śiva and Devī. And uh here also, the Devī asks questions. And I always, when I teach the text, you just identify yourself with the Devī and ask the same questions, and then the answers will come. 

And the question is, she says, “Well, I have already studied all the tantras, and I know a lot. I’ve uh I’ve listened to a lot of teaching, but still I have not experienced.” So, the question is not about telling more about all the cosmology and all the uh whatever the tantras contain, a lot of ritual, but she says, “Now please enlighten me. Please tell me how to experience.” And then, of course, comes the whole tantra is the reply to that question. And there are 112 ways of experiencing that consciousness, which in many cases is identified with *mātra*. 

And I say it is authoritative because all the great authors of Kashmir Shaivism, like Abhinavagupta, and of course Kṣemarāja, they, whenever they speak of some mystical experience or of some uh spiritual practice, they quote the *Vijnānabhairava*. It is said in the *Vijnāna*. That is a kind of stamp of authenticity. And that is why we start with this text and only selected verses of uh centering *mātra*. And then, we go more in detail. I have taught the– my very first teaching in Deer Park was on the *Vijnānabhairava*, 10 years ago. And then, when we did only the text for five, six days, then of course we did all the verses, etc. But now, we select those which are related to maybe– maybe even literally *mātra*, and then go very much in detail so that you can also uh get some help for the practicing of those uh this prac- practices described. 

And the practices are uh– not by the text itself, but by the commentators they are called Tāḍanā. And the word Tāḍanā is also well known in the Buddhist practice. And uh and Tāḍanā comes from the Sanskrit root *dhṛ*, to hold. So, *tāḍanā* is something that you have to hold something in consciousness. So, sometimes we have an idea, or it’s gone; or we have an experience, it is gone. Unless you hold it, then it can become a habit, it can become a regular experience, regular practice. So, *dhṛ*, the root *dhṛ* is important as– if you remember those who work uh with *Netra Tantra* uh it is always stressed that the practice has to be firm, *dhruva*. *Dhruva* is also the pole star. So, that firmness of the practice and of the experience is uh expressed also in the word *tāḍanā*.

So, you take one, and the beauty is, and it’s uh difficult to believe, but it must be true that the end of the whole text, Śiva is teaching the Devī 112 ways of entering into the supreme consciousness, and at the end the text says, “If you practice only one of these, you get enlightened.” So, that requires of course– I mean some people, they, they do a lot, and they practice this and that and then try and try different kinds of uh practices, but if you have a very strong focus and strong uh some *kalpa* also, we said yesterday, then one practice may be enough. But these texts are so uh they come from experience, and they should lead you to experience. So, one may be enough. So at least, if not for enlightenment, but at least for our practice, I would suggest that among those verses which we are studying this morning, you select one which speaks to you or where you say, “Yes, I can practice with that. I can take it to my meditation.” 

So we– our method is– of those when we did the *Śrī Vijnānabhairava*, we did only *Vijnānabhairava*, we recited the whole tantra, so Śiva will help us uh to recite only those verses which we are now studying. So, I tell you first– I tell you yeah, unfortunately, not everybody has the book. So, those who don’t have the book, either you sit with somebody who has [laughter] you share it, or what Michael suggested, you take notes. Take a a a photo with your mobile so that you should have the text. 

The first, I’m telling you which verses we are going to do this morning: 26– you, you can note it down or or you mark it or 26, 49, 61, 62, 68, 103, and 126. So, who does not have a neighbor, who doesn’t have a text and doesn’t have a neighbor? Uh who has the text? You can borrow from your neighbor or– these are the books from the or there is another? Jaidevsing? Jaidevsing? Jaidevsing? You can give to– do you have– can you take the German– my German translation with you? I I– okay. Yeah. Just make sure that you have a text before your eyes.

So, shall we come uh 26? 

*Navaracinnan viśeṣa śaktir maruddhūpavikāsitā nirvikalpatayā madhye tayā bhairava rūpatā*

*Navaracinnan viśeṣa śaktyā maruddhūpavikāsitenā nirvikalpa*

*tayā madhye, tayā bhairava rūpatāṃ*

*Navaracinnan viśeṣa śaktyāṃ maruddhūpavikāsite nirvikalpatayā madhye, tayā bhairava rūpatāṃ*

The whole teaching of *Bhairava* starts with *prāṇa*. Because, is the basic. Starts with breath. From 24, 25, 26. But I’m not taking the other verses. We concentrate on this 26. But of course, I mean, those– most of you are familiar with yoga and with uh the the description of the subtle body and the *prāṇas* and the the *prāṇas* and the *nāḍīs*, the subtle channels. Uh there’s no question of chakra here. That comes uh the other text. But here, there’s no question of chakra. But *prāṇa* and *nāḍi*. So, the subtle channels which are connected with different kinds of *prāṇa*. Now already in the Upaniṣads, we have clear the five *prāṇas*. And then, in yoga and in tantra, of course, these five *prāṇas* uh they become a part of a particular practice. And this is–

So, first I read my translation which I, I am sorry, it seems I never ends learning or improving myself. I have already to correct my translation. So, who has this book? Yeah. You can take a pencil and correct it. 

So, I had translated:

> “The energy of breath should neither move out nor enter. When the center unfolds by the dissolution of thoughts, then one attains the nature of *Bhairava*.” 

Now, this is not very precise because– and also, it does not exactly agree with Swamiji’s uh interpretation. Because in Sanskrit– now a few Sanskrit people are here. Uh this optative *navaracēt* can be either translated by “it should not” or just as a statement. So that important difference is– here we have to go into every– maybe you can also. But *nirvikalpa*– *nirvikalpa*, for those who are not so familiar with this. Because the *mātyā*, *śūnyā*, are very much connected with a state of thought– be free from thoughts. And this is in all yogic and spiritual traditions that the greatest obstacle is the *kalpa*, that is our thought construct, or our uh mental constructs. And the aim is to overcome and to enter a state of *nirvikalpa*, thought-free state. So, here, immediately at the beginning of the– this *sūtra*, that *prāṇa* uh that state of *nirvikalpa* is aimed at and already expressed. 

Now, if I improve my own translation, I would tell you that, in the– when the center unfolds– because it is the *mātyā*, for those who know Sanskrit. When the center unfolds by the dissolution of thoughts, *nirvikalpatayā*, then that energy of breath neither moves out nor enters. So i- the question is, what is first? First, you stop the breath, or first there is a state of *nirvikalpa*? Now, I have to tell you more about the style of uh the *Vijnāna Bhairava* because it’s extremely brief. So, you always need– either you need the oral instruction, or you have to read a commentary, but no commentary is really fully satisfactory, I must say. Um because these tantras, they consist of two lines. One line tells you what to do or what to experience; second line tells you what is the result. And often, the result is simply stated, “Then it becomes Śiva.” That’s finished. So, there is no in between. You have to complete, complement, you know, what what lies in between: the condition for that divine consciousness and how to practice and how to bring it into uh– yeah, how to bridge that gap. And *nirvikalpa* is already the the aim. *Nirvikalpa*, state of thought-freeness, is the aim. Now, how do you reach there? 

And it’s already true a thought-free state, that your breath “neither moves out nor in” means that your breath stops. Stops does not mean that you die, but that the the two– the duality of in-breath and out-breath enters into the central breath, and that is *udāna*. See, maybe *prāṇa*, *apāna*, *udāna*, and *vyāna*. Yeah, the *udāna* is the rising breath. See, breathing in and out we do it every day, and we do it all the time, uh and this is our whole life. But in that duality of the two breaths there is a middle. And that center is the central breath, moving in the central vein, *madhyanāḍi*. And that central breath is called *udāna*, and “*ud*”– always the prefix “*ud*”– means rising. Something rising up. 

And then in the whole– I mean those of you who have done later the tantra last year, they will remember there’s a whole symbolism of the three uh breaths, identified with sun, moon, and fire. Sun, moon, and fire. And *udāna* is the fiery breath. Fire also because it rises. It rise. So, this is all implied, but in this one verse you have. And here also *prāṇa* is called *marut*. *Marut* is the wind. But of course, the wind and the breath, *prāṇa*, *marut*, *vāyu*, uh it’s it’s the same. But this is a cosmic uh aspect, *marut*. *Marut* is a very ancient Vedic name of *vāyu*. And uh or and *vāyu* is *prāṇa*. So, wind and breath are of course– already in Upaniṣads uh they are the cosmic and microcosmic uh correspondences. 

So, here and prior uh it is very good if one teaches the text because it discovers some new things. I have already discovered something new. *mātyā vikāsitā* We will end with the same in the *Vijnāna* or in the *Pratyabhijñā* there: the unfoldment– unfoldment of the center. And the– but in the *Vijnāna* there it’s *mātyā vikāsitā*. So, we have really a a bridge from this text to the last text we do at the end. So, expansion of the center between the two breaths to a state– to a state free from thoughts. 

So, it doesn’t tell you how you reach to that thought-free state. It tells you already the result. But it can be a a a mutual dependence, you know, that either you focus your awareness in between the two breaths, and then the state of thought-freeness arises, o- or you are in a thought-free state, and then the breath stops. But everybody who has been experienced *samādhi* knows that when you are– you enter that uh deep absorption, then it is as as if this duality of in-breath and out-breath stops. The the breath becomes something else. Then comes the rising breath, uh *udāna*, in the central channel, *madhyanāḍi*.

So, all this is not said here, but we have to complement the brevity. And as you– as you, here, this one and a half lines tell you what happens, and the last half line tells you the result: *tayā bhairava rūpatām*. Now, this *tayā* is an instrumental feminine which is, of course, that energy. See, *prāṇa śakti*. It’s the *prāṇa* is the function of our breath, but then there is a *prāṇa śakti*, that energy. Through that energy, you attain the state of *Bhairava*. You attain the divine state. I will also, of course, uh go to so- Ramaṇa Lakṣmaṇa Joo’s uh commentary and also now Jāideva Singh who has done a great service to uh Kashmir Shaivism by translating all the texts under the guidance of his Guru uh and is extremely helpful to have these uh translations. The the only problem in his translations is he added something uh uh instead of uh leaving it just to the brevity of the– so he, he added something already from the commentary. That’s why, in my translation, I always try to stick to the brevity uh as far as possible.

Now, he has translated:

> “When the middle state develops by means of the dissolution of all dichotomizing thought constructs, the *prāṇaśakti* in the form of exhalation does not go out from the center–” 

No, the “*parā śakti*” there is not in the text in this uh edition. 

> “–Nor does that *śakti* in the form of inhalation (*apāna*) enter into the center from *parā śakti*. In this way by means of *parā śakti*, who expresses herself in the form of the cessation of *prāṇa* and *apāna*, there supervenes the state of *kevala*.” 

Now, you can see that he has added a lot of things which are not exactly in the uh that *śloka*, and which come from the commentary. But it’s always better to separate the text, like we have a *sūtra*– so *sūtras* like Śiva *Sūtras*. It’s better to keep to that brevity, and then you go on explaining and uh expanding and commenting. Uh but I love the brevity also. 

Now, now how does this thought-free state happen through which the breath stops? So, I would say that– I’ve already said– the– in a state of *samādhi* uh and also, and the text– the beauty of the *Vijnāna Bhairava* is that it gives you many experiences which are not practices, but which are spontaneous. You spontaneously, you you you are in a beautiful nature, and suddenly you feel like, you know, you become breathless. We say that also in in English, you know uh a beautiful music, and some breathless uh state, you know, because of the just overwhelm– being overwhelmed by some uh uh experience which is uh not a practice of yoga, but it has the same uh effect. It just brings you to a– and your all the– your disturbing thoughts just stop when you are spontaneously overwhelmed by uh one uh uh experience. 

So, it can be– since Swāmījī says, and this is Swāmījī and my Guru, of course, he says that he, he says uh when you establish one-pointedness in the central vein, and *mārgā* he already says means *suṣumṇā*. Now, all of you who are familiar with yoga know that is *mārgā nāḍī*, the central vein, is *suṣumṇā*. Although, I’m not very sure whether– whether it comes from the uh *Vijnāna Bhairava* anyhow. When you maintain one-pointedness in that central vein, namely *kalpa-tayā*, then what happens? *Marut*–  *ubhaya-śakti*, the energy of breath neither goes out nor comes in because *mārgārūḍha-kaścit*, the central vein, is already held in one-pointedness. 

This is the beauty. This is– there’s no effort. This– not effort. It’s already– you are in that– that there are certain *mudrās* which are also uh explained under the– in *Vijnāna Bhairava* also, in *Netra Tantra* also it’s called *viṣmaya mudrā*, when you thus surprised by something, overwhelmed by something– *viṣmaya*, or *cakita mudrā* um and then thoughts stop. It is already illuminated and by this process and becomes thought parallel. 

Now, yesterday I talked about the three *upāyas*, and this Swāmījī says clearly, “This is *śāmbhava-upāya*, the divine means.” It is not *śākta upāya*, *śākto-upāya*, because there is no practice. It is something happening. It is spontaneous centered awareness. There is no support of the two voids. There is no duality. So, the duality is already overcome. And spontaneous. So, spontaneity is also very important in uh Kashmir Shaivism because it is also called *svatantra-vāda*, and *svatantra-vāda*, *svatantra* means uh freedom, but I also translate it as spontaneity. It does not depend on uh your will or your activity, or your uh effort. Spontaneity is precisely effort free, effortless. And here, Swāmījī has identified this *śānti* with spontaneous state. And spontaneous state of centering– of centered awareness. 

So, here *nirvikalpa-tayā*, *mārgārūḍha-kaścit*. So, not uh this is actually as an expression of experience. When you have to be– you observe very subtle, but very subtle observation to feel that expansion of the center, *mārgārūḍha-kaścit*, which is beyond the duality of breathing in and breathing out. 

Now, there is a uh Abhinavagupta has quoted, and here Jāideva Singh gives some very useful notes, I have to uh acknowledge, extremely useful referring to other texts, etcetera. So, he quotes here: “Abhinavagupta has quoted these words in *Tantrāloka*, where he also emphasizes *nirvikalpa-bhāva*” means the state of thought-free-n- thoughtlessness, thought-free. He says that one should fix one’s mind with pointed awareness on the juncture– juncture of *prāṇa*, *apāna* and *udāna* in the center. Then *prāṇa* and *apāna* will be suspended, the mind will be freed of all *vikalpas*, *mātra-daśā* will develop, and the aspirant will have the re- realization of his essential self, which is the nature of *Bhairava*.”

So, yeah, *mātra-daśā* is a good uh important expression to retain. This cen- the state of the center. It’s a state uh a condition of the self, you know, in the– and the state means also something uh which remains, which is not momentarily. Momentarily, you may experience that or also being thought-free uh momentarily, but if it becomes a state, *mātra-daśā*. So, that is what is said, the establishment in the center. 

So, it is good. We have spent quite a lot of time with this one verse, and if you have any questions then uh in the afternoon we have a some session of discussion. Uh you please retain your questions because during the teaching, it could be uh an interruption. But I’m just repeating, and then we have a break. Uh the two movements or events, spontaneous events, of being thought-free and of the natural breaths, breathing in and breathing out, stopping and entering into that– expanding that center, *mārgārūḍha-kaścit*. And so, that expansion of the center is very blissful, and you are free from that alternation. And then, he– the brevity is extremely– that through that energy means the *prāṇaśakti*, through that energy of *prāṇa*, you attain the state of *Bhairava*, nothing less. Nothing less. It’s not just saying, “Well, you will be very happy, and you feel some bliss,” or that. No. It is the divine. And so, the very entering and expansion of the center, because the center is the divine. It leads you to a state of divinity. It’s tremendous.

So, we take this text– I take these texts very seriously, and until the time you have some experience which is, “Yes, it is true,” until that time, we can take it as a *śravaṇa* on which we can meditate. We can say, we can take it and uh focus on that *nirvikalpa*, even if they are– they make a *vikalpa* of *nirvikalpa*, of course, that is also attention, but there are stages, you know? Until you have that real spontaneous uh entering into that center, you have to use your thoughts also, but be always aware that that the *vikalpa* of *nirvikalpa* is not *nirvikalpa*. So, the the idea of *śūnya*. I remember once, uh someone asked M. P. G. when he was talking of *śūnya*, he said, “The idea of *śūnya* is not *śūnya*.” And that’s why, and that both *mātra* and *śūnya* are very experiential terms, and they qualify our experience and our practice. And until we have that uh uh entrance into that thought-free state, we have to focus on the text, what the text tells us, meditate with that, and then something will happen. 

So, this is a very important uh entry into the whole topic of *mātra* and *mātra-vikāsa* and*nirvikalpa* and and *tayā Bhairava-rūpatā*. This stressing that through that energy because the very same *Vijnāna Bhairava* says in verse 21, “You cannot reach Śiva except through *Śakti*.” So, Śiva can only be attained through the– through his energy. There’s no direct way. And that is why the energy which we experience daily is the *prāṇaśakti*. It’s the energy of *prāṇa* who is the very *śakti* of Śiva. So, *tayā*, through her, it just through her, capital H, you attain the nature of *Bhairava*. 

It’s– I think we uh um leave it at that, and you can of course go back to the uh verse and uh take it to meditation or that. But this is very important to start with. It is the experience starting from *prāṇa*, um from the three– here’s not the question five. Five breaths, they’re also play some role, but here’s only *prāṇa*, *udāna*, and uh *prāṇa* uh *apāna* and *udāna*, the central breath. 

So, now we have a tea break, and then the other verses we do in the second session. Please, now. Yeah. 
