# Namaḥ Śivāya

Śataṃ pañcakṛtvo 'vidhānena citānandaghanaśvātmā paramātmā vibhāsi. Namaḥ śivāya. Śataṃ pañcakṛtvo 'vidhānena citānandaghanaśvātmā paramātmā vibhāsi.

We have finished with sutra six, which is very brief. And um, the introductory uh introduction to sutra seven is important, but I will skip sutra seven itself because it leads us into all these divisions, you know, so many every everything which is in the Śaiva uh tantras has to be uh brought in here, and it's not very essential. And we want to proceed so that we can um come to those to from *saṃkocāt* to *vikāsa* and um to those uh later sutras which are um leading us into the practice also. I mean, everything leads to practice if you understand it rightly. It's not--I I I always say these texts are not cooking recipes that you take this and then this will be the result. But it is a matter of understanding. So, everything leads to practice if you understand it rightly.

Now the introductory sentence to sutra seven:

> asyaiva saṃyak svarūpajñānāt yathoktahe, saṃyaktva-saṁsāraḥ tadā tilaśa etac svarūpaṁ nirvaktuṁ uh ah.

Now, since the correct or right um knowledge of one's own essential nature--now, *svarūpa* in Śaivism is always preferred to *ātman*. When they speak of *ātman* it's mostly the individual self, individual being, the soul or whatever. But referring to the essential nature, this they speak of *svarūpa*. Um, the one's essential nature and then you have a still higher grade, it becomes *svasvarūpa*, your very own essential nature, which is divine, *svasvarūpa*.

So since liberation, *mukti*, consists in a correct knowledge of one's essential nature, one's own true nature, and incorrect knowledge constitutes *saṁsāra*, constitutes the world of transmigration, therefore *tilaśa* means in detail, uh *tilaśa* is uh sees um uh sees also in very small detail um this this *svarūpa*, this essential nature is going to be told. But we jump over sutra seven because this is he becomes twofold and uh fourfold and fivefold and so on, so. Because it's also too brief, the explanation is too brief.

The problem with the texts which are short--it's not only in Kaśmīr Śaivism, but others also--it's wonderful they are short, but they're then so condensed that you need so much of explanation. Take the *Tantrasāra*. Abhinavagupta's *Tantrāloka* has twelve volumes, and *Saṃskṛt Tantrasāra* is just one small volume, but it is so full of um hints, you know, and you have to explain so many things and add so many notes, so that brevity is an advantage and a disadvantage because you have to add many things which are not um explicitly explained in the text.

So we're coming to sutra eight. And there's no introductory sentence. Now this is a very um anyway, even um a funny way of um relating one's own system to other schools of philosophy and spirituality. Now, every um system, every tradition has uh this problem: how do you accommodate other traditions? Either you say they are all false, they are wrong and they're excluded and so on, or you include them as a kind of lower grade into your own system, but so how do you deal with this? And he has--because the all these Kaśmīrī authors are very much steeped into its aesthetics and dramaturgy, so he uses a a wonderful uh simile. Kṣemarāja is himself the author of the sutra and of the commentary. And um it is uh generally accepted--as we also recited in that *śloka*--that sutras have manifold meanings. But so he also gives to his own sutra two completely different meanings, depending on the meaning of these words:

> Tat pūmikā sarvadarśana-sthitiḥ yā.

Now, *pūmikā* has several meanings. It means a stage, uh uh state, and uh there's so many um can here a level. It also means uh uh it also means uh role, a role in a drama. And yaḥ. 

So the first meaning which he um applies here uh the *sthitis*, *sthitis* means the positions of all the philosophical doctrines are like roles assumed by that actor, who is the pure consciousness. So pure consciousness um assumes different roles. So, in in itself it is a very uh I mean universal statement. You give a place to every system, whether you agree with it or you don't agree with it, but if any system of philosophy or spirituality has come about, it it is also based on that consciousness. But this consciousness assumes different roles, like the same actor when he is in a civil uh persona civil persona, he looks different and then he he takes uh assumes different roles in uh in acting. So it is a because *cit* is already as we have always said is a feminine, it is personified, it is a *śakti*, an energy, and um uh he doesn't speak here of *cit*, but it is implied. It is Śiva who is that actor, who assumes these different roles.

And this is a very uh old um idea also because Śiva is the original um artist. And uh artist in different senses. For the painter, is he paints the whole cosmic uh picture. And all these images come in the in the tantras themselves. He's a painter, he's a musician, he's a dancer, he is a an actor, he is a stage director, so he is the original artist. And so he can assume different roles where he acts something, but he remains himself. The actor uh does not really become Hamlet. He acts as Hamlet or uh anybody. And then he comes back to his normal um uh being, then he is the what he is. So in that way, it is Śiva who is assuming all these act acts as in the roles of the different philosophical systems. So as a general statement, this is very open and um universal.

But then when he comes to describe those *darśanas*, uh it but it becomes very funny because he a little bit, he makes fun of some of those um those systems. It is not a philosophical criticism, but it is a a very general criticism of uh of these different philosophical systems, starting from the Cārvākas, means the materialists. And since he has at his disposal the the list of the 36 *tattvas*, so he places some of those uh systems at the level of one of or the other of those *tattvas*. And because Śiva himself also assumes the those roles of those *tattvas*, he himself becomes earth, he himself becomes uh water himself--every *tattva* is also a personification of Śiva. And that way all these *darśanas* or these uh systems are placed at different levels of the *tattvas*. So, one should not feel offended if any particular uh system is not taken very seriously, and they are very briefly um and only hinted at. There's no elaboration. 

So he starts with the Cārvākas at the lowest scale of uh all the philosophical doctrines. Cārvākas--Cārvākādi. *Ādi* means all these these materialists. um *darśanāṁ sthiti yā*. *citāṁ tatra asyātmāno 'ntaśveta avagṛhītā kṛtrimā pūmikā*. These are assumed roles, *kṛtrimā*. *Tadā ca etan* uh *etani aviśiṣṭam śarīram ātmā*. Yeah, these materialists, they think that this this body is the self. 

But finished. We have a story like this in the Upaniṣads, in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad where Upakosala comes uh to to learn about the *ātman*, and then his uh guru tells him um stage by stage. Because you cannot tell the highest immediately, you know? We has to be prepared for that. And every time he has to spend thirty-two years years at the feet of his guru, serving the guru, and then he is told the next stage. And the first stage is simply: this body is the *ātman*. So then this Indra, son Indra, who is learning from Upakosala, and then Indra is going back very happily, he says, "Okay, this body is the self, so I'm making myself beautiful. I'm eating good food and all." So, but then he feels that something is missing, so it is not it cannot be something uh is wrong with this. Then he goes back to his guru, and then he tells him something else, so he has to spend so many years at the feet of his guru until he gets to know the real *ātman*, which is neither the body nor the *prāṇa*, nor uh the senses, and so on and so on. It's a beautiful story, typical guru-śiṣya story of the Upaniṣads.

So the what the Cārvākas, they simply uh ex- assume that the body is the self. So, there's nothing beyond the body.

And then uh the Naiyāyikas, the uh followers of Nyāya, of the logicians, we are not going into all the details and this is um just a an enumeration of these systems. *jñānādi-guṇagaṇāśrayaṃ buddhi-tattva-prāyaṃ eva ātmānaṃ saṃsṛṣṭau manya- manyante*. The Naiyāyikas, the followers of logic, they take the intellect to be the self. Because everything uh has to be judged by their intellect, by *buddhi*.

Then the next one, *ahaṃ pratiti  sukhaduḥkhādy-upādhi-bhir dirāṣkṛto ātmā iti manvāna mīmāṁsakāḥ* Next school are the Mīmāṁsakas. The Mīmāṁsakas--*mīmāṁsakas* are those who are making the Vedic exegesis. And they are *ampratīti-pratyayaḥ*. The followers of Mīmāṁsā also tied down to *buddhi* in as much as they think that what is known in the cognition of "I" is veiled by the *upādhis*, that is the limiting conditions of pleasure and pain, as the self.

And then come the Buddhists, but it's a very brief very brief *jñāna-santāna eva tattvaṃ iti Saugatāḥ*. The Buddhists here called Saugatā, followers of Sugata, the Buddha, uh *buddhi-vṛttiṣu eva paryāvasitāḥ*. *jñāna-santāna* means the flow of cognitions. The reality in which they which they accept is a flow of cognition. So they--that refers to the *kṣaṇika* *kṣaṇikatva* uh *vāda*, the uh momentaryness. It's a flow flow of uh perceptions, a flow of cognitions. This is what the uh Buddhists *paryāvasayitāḥ*. 

Then *prāṇa eva ātmā iti kecit śruti-antividāḥ*. Śruti-anti are of course the Vedāntins, but Vedānta has so many schools, and here especially in the Upaniṣads themselves there are so many different approaches to Ātman or to Brahman, and one of uh this is in Upaniṣads that *prāṇa* is Brahman. The life breath or the uh vital um energy is Brahman. So this is one point of view in the Upaniṣads. 

And other uh Vedāntins *asadeva idaṃ āsīt ity abhāvā-brahma-vādinah*. And other Brahma-vādins--means other Vedāntins--they believe in non-existence because there is a statement in the Upaniṣads: "In the beginning there was um uh non-being." *asat eva* um *agra āsīt*. In the beginning there was non-being. So they assume that uh reality consists in non-existence, *abhāva* *śūnyā-bhāvam avagāhya sthitāḥ*. And they are they are steeped at the at the level of uh emptiness. So, *śūnya-bhāva* uh but uh yeah. 

So what he implies apart from judging this different systems is it's alright. Everybody has reached a certain um experience of reality or certain understanding of reality, but it is not not the uh ultimate one. 

Mādhyamikā very briefly *api eva meva eva meva* means the Mādhyamikās they also believe in *śūnya*, although this *śūnya* is certainly not the same *śūnya*. But he doesn't go into the differences. *parā-prakṛti-bhagavān vāsudevaḥ tad-viśpuliṅgāḥ prāyā eva jīvā iti pañcarātra-pāraśaya-prakṛtayaḥ*. Now these Pāñcarātrins, these are the followers, the Vaiṣṇavas of the early school. They um believe in the supreme *prakṛti*, supreme uh nature. *prakṛti* not *prakṛti* but *parā-prakṛti*. And which is the nature of uh *vāsudevaḥ*, Lord *vāsudevaḥ*, who is the highest cause. And the individual souls are like sparks of him. *viśpuliṅgāḥ prāyā jīva*. And so, assuming the individual souls as transformation of the highest cause, they cling to *prakṛti*, to the non-manifest. 

Now Sāṅkhya. *Sāṅkhyādayaḥ tu vijñāna-akalā-prāyaṃ bhūmiṃ avalambate*. The Sāṅkhyas um Now Sāṅkhyas are the opposed both by the Śaivites and by the Buddhists um also in great detail, but of course not here. Sāṅkhyās, they are reached a stage of *vijñāna-akalā*. That is one of those seven stages of the experience where uh they um *vijñāna-akalā* is characterized by knowledge but no power to act, no freedom. He has knowledge, and that knowledge because of discrimination, *viveka*. The Sāṅkhyas, they discriminate between *prakṛti* and *puruṣa*. So, with this discrimination that matter ends. They cannot act. They cannot um they have no freedom.

Then Then there are some theistic schools of um Vedānta *īśvara-tattva-padaṃ āśritā apare śruti-*. These are all Vedānta Vedānta schools which believe in *īśvara*. And which accept that in the beginning there was being. So, *sat* like in the Upaniṣads, one statement is there was non-being in the beginning, another statement: "In the beginning there was being." and that those are the *īśvara-vādins*, the theists, the theistic Vedāntins. 

And then there are the those who accept *śabda-brahma*, that Brahman is um These are the linguistic philosophers, the philosophers of Brahma-vyākaraṇa, who who accept that Brahman is the word, *śabda*. *paśyanty-rūpaṃ ātma-tattvam*. And they accept the self to be of the form of *paśyantī*. Now, *paśyantī* is that second stage in descent from the highest level of the word: *parā*, *paśyantī*, *madhyamā*, *vaikharī*. And these grammarians, they don't go beyond *paśyantī*. They um they don't go to the transcendent level of *parā*. So they are at the level of *paśyantī*. These are the grammarians. 

And so on. And uh then it is a very general statements about these role sessions sent by the Divine actor um *Evam anya-da api anomānya- anomāntavyam*. Uh, other systems also can be conceived similarly. And this has been stated in the Āgamas *buddhi-tattve sthitā bhauṭā guṇe- guṇaiś ca eva āgata sthitā sthitā veda-vidā bhu̐si avyakte pañcarātrikāḥ*. This is in the Āgamas that's uh uh placing these systems, the Buddhists, the Jains, the uh the Vedāntins, and the Pāñcarātrins at the level of *buddhi*, of *guṇair* *guṇa* and of *puruṣa* and of *prakṛti*. These uh four systems. 

So this is very brief uh and definitely they are not doing justice to this systems. But the general idea is um very uh unique. You don't find this in any other text, that the Lord himself uh assumes the roles of different philosophical systems. So they are not um uh excluded. They're only placed at the lower level um because of course one's own is always the highest level in every tradition, maybe, whether it's Christian or in any tradition, one's own is always the highest. The question is: how do we deal with the others? 

Then he comes to the Tāntrikas. Because there are different Tāntrika schools also, not only one. *viśvotīrṇaṃ ātma-tattvam iti tāntrikaḥ*. The Tāntrikas in general they believe that the the reality of the self is transcending the universe. *viśva-mayaṃ iti kulādy-āmnāya-viśiṣṭāḥ*. And the followers of *kula*, the *kula* tradition of Tantra, they accept the self to be uh immanent, *viśvamaya*. But the followers The followers of Trika--that is the triadic system which he follows--they accept the reality of the self to be both transcendent and immanent: *viśvotīrṇa* and *viśvamaya*. 

So So far Now These are all *evam ekaś ca eva cid-ātmano bhagavataḥ svātantrya abhāṣitā sarvā imā bhūmikāḥ*. All these are roles accepted by the Lord, who is of the nature of consciousness, *cid-ātman*, who is one one and of the nature of consciousness. And who Yeah. Thus he says um that if--seeing of the one Divine whose essence is consciousness--all these roles are displayed by His absolute will, *svātantrya*, by His freedom. 

Actually, the whole image of the artist for the Divine it also implies freedom because what the artist acts out of freedom. He is not obliged to paint. I mean, he may be obliged, but the the essential nature of art is uh freedom. And that is why this *svātantrya citte* uh *svātantrya*, it is also manifested in creativity of any kind.

Now we come to the um The first he gives some reasonings that many *atha eka eva ethāvān vyāpika ātmā*. And therefore the self is one only which is all-pervasive. The all-pervasive means precisely that he has the capacity to assume so many different roles. By His own freedom *mitta-dṛṣṭayā dṛṣṭayā tu aṁśa-aṁśikāsu tad-icchayā eva abhimānaṃ agṛhīta yena de- uh deha-ādiṣu bhūmiṣu* and so on. Those of limited vision, however, in various parts are caused to identify themselves with the various limited stages by His will, by His will on account of which, even though when it is made clear--he makes such long sentences like Jayarāja himself--"On account of which, even though when it is made clear that the essential reason of the erroneous concepts of the preceding experience lies in their identification with the body etcetera, they are unable to comprehend the great pervasion of the Ātman described above."

Now, this is a very important term: *mahā-vyāpti*. And *mahā-vyāptiṃ paraśakti-pātaṃ vinā na labhante*. They don't attain that *mahā-vyāpti*. *mahā-vyāpti* is that omnipervasion. And this is the very the highest stage of um the pervasive pervasive  -ness of consciousness, and there are different stages um *ātmāvyāpti*, *śivāvyāpti*, um *mahāvyāpti*. So *dehāvyāpti*, it starts from the pervasion of the body. And so this this pervasion is because the the omnipervasiveness is the most important characteristic of the divine. Of Śiva. He's omnipervasive, and we have reached certain levels of pervasiveness, whether in our body or in our mind or in um uh at the uh level of until that *Aatma Mahāvyāpti*, that all pervasiveness, when the consciousness becomes all pervasive. That is *Mahāvyāpti*, and this is only possible by the descent of the Supreme Energy, *parāśakti-pāta*, by the Supreme Power descending. As we had in the very beginning, the very be- starting point of this text is unless you are touched by this *śakti-pāta*, by this descent of energy, uh you cannot even start on this path. But to reach that *Mahāvyāpti*, you have to be in that uh *parāśakti-pāta*, with that Supreme power of Supreme grace.

And then we leave out those uh quotations um and we come to the completely different second interpretation, which is very important. Now here he takes that is on page 69, um uh lower uh section, he takes *bhūmikā* and *darśana* in different senses. *Bhūmikā* as I said it is also a stage. Uh, not a stage, in the in the in the theater, but a stage in spiritual um uh development. Uh, we have it in Buddhism, uh *daśabhūmikā*. 

Se- can you very preliminary rituals make *Bhūmikā* can compare it to preliminary rituals? Yeah. Yeah.  

And *Bhūmikā* has so many uh meanings, but um uh and all are related to certain stages of uh um levels. So *bhūmikā* here he takes as a um stage in the spiritual um path and *darśana* as not a system of philosophy but as um uh knowledge. 

> Api ca sarveṣāṃ darśanānāṃ samastānāṃ nīlarasasukhadyajñānānāṃ ca sthitayā jñānam. 

So, *darśana* it takes as um acts uh of knowledge. Knowledge which is like external perceptions, like you see the blue sky--blue, external percep- perception; sugar, happiness, internal perception and so on. Um, all these are acts of perception or acts of uh cognition. You can say *jñāna*. And those states uh states *sthitayā* so at the end of page 69 you have that:

> Darśana has to be interpreted not as a system of philosophy but merely as knowledge. Sthiti not a stage but as inward cessation. Bhūmikā, not as rule but as means.

The whole interpretation is as follows: 

> Antaḥpraśāntapada -da avasthitiḥ.

Now now this we had already. The inward cessation of all *Darśanas*, means of all empirical knowledge. *Darśana* here is empirical because both *nīlarasa*, *sukkha* and all that that is like blue, uh pleasure et cetera, becomes a means of the manifestation of the essential nature of that that is Śiva, who is of the nature of consciousness and mass of bliss. *Saṃvit saṃtati āśutranā*. No, no, this is *Vastu upasaṃhāra*. Uh *bāhya*  *bāhyavastu upasaṃhāra*. That means the *upasaṃhāra*, that absorption of all the external perceptions in the inner uh within. *Praśāntapadāvasthiti*, inner state of um pacification, of peace, or of uh cessation. Resting in a condition of inner peace, and then commencement of a continuous series of various experiences, *saṃvitsaṃtati*, which will be arising anew.  

And then he comes to the *turīya*. I think everybody knows the four states of consciousness. uh *jāgrat*, *svapna*, *suṣupti* and *turīya*. So, awakening, dream, deep sleep and the fourth which is transcendent. The transcendence state which we experience in *Samādhi* or in meditation.  

So the *turīya* state:

> That this venerable turīya consciousness whose nature is to hold together emanation, maintenance and reabsorption, flashes forth ceaselessly. Now sending forth diversities of various emanations and now withdrawing them, always emaciated and yet always full. 

Now again, this is *saṃvit*, but *tārikā*. She is the Great Goddess consciousness. It is she, and she is identified with the *turīyāvasthā*, the state, the fourth state here in feminine also. *Turīyā* who *turīyā saṃvit tārikā*, the fourth, who is the Great Goddess consciousness. As I said in the morning that Śivarāja, his favorite deity was uh *citiśakti* or *saṃvit devī* or *saṃvid bhagavatī* or whatever you call it. Without giving her any name, but he always expresses such this great uh sense of uh respect to It's not an abstract term, you know. This pure consciousness is so abstract. But for him it is she is a power. She is the power of consciousness. She's a goddess. And she is ever full, *sadā pūrṇā*. And yet *kṛśā*. And yet emaciated. Now you think of all those deities uh uh who is *kṛśā* is for example Cāmuṇḍā. Cāmuṇḍā is completely emaciated. And other forms of her uh full, *pūrṇa*. And of both forms and yet of none. So she is full, she is empty, she is both full and empty. This almost Nāgārjuna's negation, and yet she is neither full nor empty. So, she is somehow personified, and yet she is beyond any personification and beyond any manifestation. *Akramaṃ evāsphurantī sthitā*, and she is established in timelessness, *akrama*, without any succession. So, this consciousness, Goddess consciousness, she is successionless. She's timeless. She's both full and empty. Neither full nor empty, both full and empty. So this is a uh uh uh you can feel how Śivarāja has this intense relationship with this uh *bhagavatī*, uh this deity of consciousness. 

And he quotes this something uh *tāvad ārtāvalihena uttiṣṭati*. That's a mistake in it. *Pūrṇā ca bhagavatī*. When we absorbing the objects, this energy flashes arises in her nature and so she is full. Full because she contains the universe. She contains everything. And empty because she is uh somebody said the "black hole of consciousness". Totally empty. So without that emptiness also, she could not be full.  She is all things and she is nothing.  I thought that this uh Goddess has this absolute dynamic nature and yet she is also beyond time, *akrama*. 

And at uh page 71 *Aiṃśācāpattarikā kramāt kramāt kramādhikaṃ anuśīlyamānā svātmāsāt- -karoti evā bhaktajanam*. Now this um  this Goddess consciousness gradually, *kramāt kramāt* by um being resorted to more and more, *adhikaṃ adhikaṃ anuśīlyamānā*. Uh, who knows a bit the Hindi *vala*, they can understand very well what is *anuśīlana*? *Anuśīlana* means also to to cultivate or to um to resort to. Uh, can you say something more uh related to *anuśīlana* is is to Yeah, to to practice also. To to practice, as to appropriate, to make it your own. 

So if you resort to that Goddess consciousness evermore, *adhikaṃ* *svātmāsāt- -sātkaroti*. She--you are not the subject. She is the subject. She will make you her own. And this is uh whom *bhaktajanam*, she will make her devotees her own. So this is again this turning around: who is the subject and who is the object? The subject is the Goddess consciousness herself, and she makes the devotees her own. So, it's not we who appropriate her. She appropriates us. She uh  makes us one with her. *Ātmāsātkaroti*.  She makes us one with herself.  So what our part to play is this *anuśīlana*? Means to be ever engaged in or ever to cultivate her. Evermore to um practice. *Anuśīlana* is also practice. So, this con- -tinuous practice of being aware of this power of consciousness. And then she will make us her own, *ātmāsātkaroti*. 

Then again the introduction. Yes. In this case, it's more *paramāśakti* or Because it's not it's like *śiva* and *śakti* is a void and you need to in so it should be *paramāśakti* or not? No, this is just um that the power of consciousness is i- is actually everything. But it's not a specific uh uh *śakti*, but it is it is everything, and through her only you reach Śiva. So unless she makes you her own uh you cannot uh reach Śiva, *ātmāsātkaroti*. So, she takes the initiative. That  Shiva Shakti Patra is again the Shakti takes the initiative. You only have to be receptive. And also *Anushilanam*, to have to of but we had *paramārtha-anusāriṇah*. Those who are following this that highest goal. That highest reality, that is our task. It's not that by being totally passive and just expecting that this *Shakti* will fall down from heaven. That is not certainly. It requires attention, it requires awareness and cultivating her. We also speak now cultivating friendship, for example. So, you cultivate friendship with that divine power, *Anushilanam*.

I think we will only um see the introduction to the sutra nine. And this is the question which is he is constantly trying to answer:

> Yadi evam bhūtasya ātmano vibhūtiḥ tad katham ayam malāvṛtānu kalādhy- āvalittaḥ saṃsāri abhīyate.

If that soul has such greatness, *vibhūtiḥ*, then how come that it is limited and transmigrating? This is uh uh such greatness, *vibhūtiḥ*, and then how it is limited--*anu anu* is just like an atom, like a tiny particle, who is not united with the totality with the whole. So, how come that this soul which has such great power is still limited and transmigrating in *saṃsāra*. 

So then the next two sutras are the next sutras is an answer. *Citvat- śaktisaṃkoca- ātmalāvā saṃsārī* Who is that *saṃsārī*? Who is that transmigrating soul? It is Shiva by himself. *Citvat-* like consciousness. *Śakti-saṃko-* due to the contraction of power, contraction of energy. He becomes--he means in brackets Shiva--becomes the transmigrating soul, who is enveloped with impurities. Because as a *saṃsārī*, the characteristic of *saṃsārī* is impurities, *mala*. But it is Shiva himself who becomes uh this *saṃsārin*. He is his reality, but it is *citvat-śaktisaṃko- malāvṛtaḥ saṃsāryaḥ*. 

> Yatā cit-ātmā parameśvaraḥ svasvātantryād abhedavyāptiṃ nimajya bhedavyāptiṃ avalambate, tadā tadīya icchā-ādi-śaktayaḥ asaṃkucitā api saṃkocavatyo bhānti. 

Now this is uh you can always read uh Jagat's translation. So I'm making making it a little more free. If the supreme lord, *parameśvara*, is of the nature of consciousness, *cit-ātmā*, out of his own very own freedoms, *svasvātantryāt*, he gives up his state of non-separation, giving up his state of non-separation *abhedavyāptiṃ nimajya* and he assumes uh the state of difference, *bheda* and *abheda*. *Abheda* is also um also essentially he is non-differentiated, non-separate. But giving up his own um state of pure non-separation, non-difference, he assumes the state of difference. *bhedavyāptiṃ avalambate*. And because of that, though he he is *asaṃkucitaḥ*, although he is non-contracted, and he he owns all those energies, *icchā* etcetera. Will, knowledge, activity, these are all his energies. But he then he shines in a contracted form, *saṃkoca-vatyoḥ*. 

So, it is Shiva himself who assumes the state of limitation. And that's why I mean his energies also become limited. Now there is a whole psychology. So, I don't want to burden you. I know the afternoon session is always a little um tiring because of the heat and so on. So we we shouldn't um be overburdened with um uh so many uh texts, but um what follows now in the this interpretation of descending that Shiva descending down from his state of absolute non-difference to this state of differentiation, is a whole psychology of how the divine um qualities become human qualities in limitation. And um this is the doctrine of--not doctrine, but these are also among the *tattvas*, if you see the list of *tattvas*--*kañcukas*. *Kañcukas* means limiting, limiting um veiling powers. And this is a fantastic topic in it--you don't find it anywhere else except in Shaivism. Uh, this limiting um aspects which are actually only the negative side of divine qualities. And there is an article, for those who are more interested in Shaiva psychology, uh on this *kañcukas*, which is uh very useful. If you're interested you can have a look and then we will deal with this subject tomorrow because it's really very important to understand.

So this is uh by uh Professor Torella. And uh it's too long to make a photocopy, but I will keep it here and please don't remove it. And if you look at it just keep it back. um Because in this topic of the *kañcukas*, of this limiting um he has a very funny translation, but that's not the point. There's really whole psychology is involved. Psychology of Tantra because the same the limiting factors which are at the same time also um factors which uh unite us with the divine qualities. And uh he has that nice uh expression. He says the Tantrikas are always uh borderline, interested in borderline. And he explains it very beautifully uh that this is really a very impor- important subject, how this divine qualities become limited in us and uh and how they can be re- retransformed into divine qualities.

So, I think I leave this for tomorrow morning. And morning we are always more fresh and we can proceed faster. And um But now there will be no time for reading. But I just want to mention, yesterday I heard from some of you that you don't know--some of you don't know--what is *Vighnah Bhairava Tantra*. So, I will take the *Vighnah Bhairava* with us on the hill. And maybe we can do one or two of the *dhāraṇās* um and you know, meditation up there. And so, there are two translations. I'll just take one and uh so we'll have--if we leave at 4:00, then we have enough time to sit up there and then to walk