##  Namaste Śivāya!

_Namaḥ śivāya satataṁ pañca-kṛtya-vihāriṇe cit-ānanda-ghana-svarūpam paramātma-vibhāsi._ 

I want to start with a śloka which our author Kṣemarāja addresses to his Guru Abhinavagupta, and I address it to my Guru Swami Lakshman Joo of Kashmir. His name is not there, but the meaning is the same. 

_Abhinavabudhaditya-dyuti-vikāsita-hṛtsarojā me rasayataḥ sarasa-rasa-parimalaṁ asāra-saṁsāra-vāsanā-śāntyai._

The lotus of my heart, having bloomed due to the light of the sun of new insight or the wisdom of Abhinava, may the essence flow forth in order to pacify the impure worldly impressions devoid of essence. So, it is the sun of the enlightenment of the Guru which makes the lotus of the heart of the disciple blossom. This is a very traditional image, but, uh, Kṣemarāja, uh, offers this verse again and again in different works to his Guru, the great Abhinavagupta.

Now I welcome you to this retreat seminar, and in the spirit of _prativijñā_ or **recognition**, I welcome you **home**. **Home** here in three meanings: 

1. The first is that we have already been received... uh... the first is that many of us feel already at home in this Deer Park Institute which has such a wonderful spiritual atmosphere, where we are really... we can also... our heart can unfold and can blossom, uh, in the spiritual atmosphere here and with all the facilities offered to us. So, this is also a kind of homecoming, even for those who have never been here. I'm sure they will feel this atmosphere of friendliness and of spiritual, uh, practice which is... and of so many great teachers who have been teaching here in this very hall. And I feel very privileged to be in this seat where this great... Rimpoches have been teaching, uh, even giving the Buddhist teachings. 
2. Now, **home**, in a deeper sense, means we are coming here for a retreat, and retreat means coming home to ourselves. So, this is a homecoming that we have to use this time for; homecoming into our own... own self. **Own self** means to the core of our being, which is what we are going to practice in meditation. 
3. And in a third meaning, **homecoming** can also mean that, um, you find the spiritual tradition where you suddenly feel that your search has been fulfilled. At least, I have to say this for myself: when I came to Kashmir Shaivism-- and I have been practicing or studying many Indian wisdom traditions as we call them here-- but when I came to **Kashmir Shaivism**, it was like a homecoming. So that what you have been searching or been going hither and thither, and, uh, suddenly you feel everything falls into place. So that is when you... when you go home after being outside for, uh, a long time and then you feel this... this feeling of, uh, yes, what in Kashmir Shaivism is called _viśrānti_, and so you... you get a... a state of peace and where things are falling into place, and you are held by a spirituality and the tradition which, um, fulfills your spiritual needs. 

But this **homecoming** to a tradition has nothing to do with fundamentalism or any, uh, kind of narrow exclusivism like, uh, some, uh, traditions are, uh, in that, uh, seen in that negative light. It has nothing to do (with that). It is from this **homecoming** that you can reach out to other spiritual traditions, to other, um, religions or spiritual traditions. And... but you have a base where you can find your practice and your... a ground on which to stand, and the ground on which to stand from which you can reach out. 

And this was my very first experience in, uh, Deer Park. And that time, I didn't know Deer Park. I was brought here by, uh, Sharma Ji with the beard, and, um, there were 32 participants coming from six religions-- but _really_ religions! I mean, there were Jews from Israel, there were... there was one Muslim from, uh, Kashmir, there was, uh, there was a Jesuit priest, and so _really_ six religions. So, in the beginning, I thought, "My God", you know, "how am I going to, um, to, uh, manage this diversity?" But what brought us... there was absolutely no conflict. What brought us together was practicing together and focusing on the spiritual experience. There was no question of defending any theology or any philosophy, but practicing a spiritual, um, experience, which is contained... at that time, in that text was _Vijñāna Bhairava_. And in the end, we discovered that everybody has been enriched. There was no question of any conflict, but this text and this practice had brought us very close to each other.

Now, the very theme of the philosophy and the spirituality that we are going to study and practice these days already tells you that it is not something alien or far-fetched, but it is the **recognition of our own true nature**, as the **Kashmir Shaivites** always repeat. And that is the aim of this teaching, of this text: _prati-abhijñā_, **recognition**. But before giving you an introduction to the system, it is necessary first to know each other. Although, in such a big group, I may not remember your names and so on, but at least we must have an idea, uh, with whom we are, uh, uh, sitting, with whom we are practicing, and it gives me also a feeling for the group, and, um, I think this is quite, um, necessary. 

But, um, and then we will move... I mean, today is just the introductory, uh, session. We will move **from the periphery to the center**. That's also the movement which the text itself, uh, does, you know, **from the periphery to the center**. So **periphery** means also all the practical things we have to, uh, discuss or to understand: the program and the, uh, discipline, and, and so on. So this is just **periphery**, but it is necessary so that afterward there's no disturbance, nothing distracts us from this, uh, retreat seminar. 
