## namaḥ śivāya

namaḥ śivāya śāśvataṁ pañcakṛtyavibhāgine citānandaghana svātma parama arthavibhāgine namaḥ śivāya śāśvataṁ pañcakṛtyavibhāgine citānandaghana svātma parama arthavibhāgine.

So I hope at the end you are not drowned in that ocean of doubts, which we were supposed to cross over with the boat of the word of the guru and the word of the text, which is also a guru. And the multiple meanings and all that um, multiple meanings of a _sūtra_, of a word, etcetera. But this is part of the whole tradition and of the richness. If you have understood, I always tell my students, if but if you have grasped 10%, and then this 10% of understanding [will] uh pull you, the the attract you to know more and to expand it, that is sufficient. Uh, that pretension to understand everything in one seminar is absolutely wrong. And uh the important thing is to have that attraction, or that yeah, that even one part of understanding. If you understand one _sūtra_ or one word, and according to the whole philosophy, that one word contains everything, *sarvaṁ sarvātmakam*. Everything is contained in one aspect. So this this the whole philosophy is like this, *sarvaṁ sarvātmakam*. So we need not despair if we have not understood a great part of the text, or um anything like this. But even one part or one fraction or one _sūtra_ which uh touches us, which strikes a chord, and which makes us go further on this uh spiritual path, that is would be already quite something.

So we are in the explanation of the last _sūtra_, which is a very uh still leave it here, because we are still following that. The last _sūtra_ which uh gives you the result of the whole teaching. The result of this whole text and whole teaching where he packs a lot of things. But the essential is that pure I-consciousness, which is identical with the divine, the Lord over the wheel of energies, *cakreśvaraḥ*. You have to attain that center, and that center which um well if you are at the center of a circle... *Cakra* means a circle. Then you have the whole circle. So you become the *cakreśvara* of all these energies, all the _śaktis_, which are internal, external, etcetera. And there is a very uh interesting parallel. Buddha is called *cakravartin*. Here also the word *cakravartin* comes. It is sometimes interpreted only in that sense of the ruler of the universe, but this *cakravartin* is this *cakra*, and this *cakra* is our own um the wheel of our own energies, in our understanding. But the Buddhists have other interpretations, but *cakra* means more than just uh the universal uh rulership. So he becomes a *cakravartin* or *cakreśvara*. It means the same. So attaining to that center, and as we have seen, the turning point of the entire text was attaining the center and expanding that center, *madhyavikāsa*. So once you are in the center of that wheel, the whole wheel becomes under your control, because otherwise we are under the control of this external, of the periphery, the senses and energies which are at the periphery. But if we are at the center, then the periphery is also under our control. That's why *cakravartin* and *cakreśvara*. So this is uh uh the the end of this whole long compound, *cakreśvaratāprāptiḥ*. Attainment of the lordship over the the wheel of consciousness, *citdevatā*. The wheel of the deities of our own consciousness. So so many things are contained here! The whole concept that our consciousness, all the aspects of our consciousness, is divine. The *devatā*, *indriyadevatā*, the the divinity of the senses. And then all this is qualified uh, which we have already seen, and he is going on describing the implications of what is the attainment, *prāpti*. 

So we are on page 108 of the book. So the the whole this long compound starts with *ākāśa*, and then the, so the uh light and bliss. And then he, here he says what is this light, *prakāśa*. *nahi paramārthika prakāśa āveśaṁ vinā kasyāpi prakāśamānana mānatā kathā te*. Nothing at all exists or manifests without that light of consciousness. That supreme or ultimate, *paramārthika prakāśa*, without *āveśa*, without *praveśana*, or immersion or being immersed in that uh ultimate light of consciousness, *paramārthika prakāśa āveśaḥ*. So *āveśa* comes again and again. That *praveśana*, that immersion or absorption. So without absorption into that light of the ultimate reality, nothing at all would appear, would be manifest. And this light is *parameśvara*, is the Supreme Lord. 

And now comes um what Raj was saying, that here the whole philosophy of language is missing. But it comes. It comes, but in a very abbreviated uh way. *svātmantryasāratvāt*. Because of the, his essentially being of the nature of freedom, *svātantrya*. Here is again a very long compound, which I am going to skip, because, not the meaning, but the reading out of his own freedom. See what is the manifestation of the universe in Shaiva philosophy is identical with the manifestation of language. There is no consciousness without language. And language means all the elements of language, from the alphabet to the *mantra*, to then the sentences and uh everything else. But language, consciousness, and the universe are coextensive. That's why the manifestation, and he has not talked about it before, but here he very briefly comes to that. *A* aādi starting with *a* and ending with *kṣa*, *kṣāntaḥ mayoyaśabdarāśiḥ parameśvara mayatvena eva* by my, I made… Yeah, he has made in the translation also he has made a very long sentence. So the subject is *parameśvara*, the Supreme Lord, who is *ānandaprasaranirbhara*, who is full with the flow, flow of bliss. Uh you will always find whenever the these authors have a chance, they will express something in dynamic terms and not in static terms. So it's not only bliss, but the flow, flowing of bliss, *ānandaprasaranirbhara*. And because he is free from all desires, *sarvākaṅkṣaśūnyatayā*, because being free from all desires, *paripūrṇatvāt*, out of his fullness, his complete fullness, he manifests the entire world starting from *a* and ending with *kṣa*. Now in the Tantric um alphabet, well the the normal Sanskrit alphabet is from *a* to *ha*, and that will also come. But in the Tantric um system, the last letter is *kṣa*. So *akṣa*, you know *akṣamālā*. It is from *a* to *kṣa*. That means the entire alphabet, the entire language, all the *mantras* are contained from *a* to *kṣa*. *Akṣa* means also I. So there is a whole play uh with this word *akṣa*. But from *a* to *kṣa* means the whole of language, means all the *mantras*, the whole of everything is contained from *a* to *kṣa*. And because the world consists of um expression, verbal expression, and objects which are expressed, so this is *vācaka* and *vācya*. So that is why language is the basis of uh the expressions in words and the the objects indicated. So all this is contained in that fullness of the Lord, who is full of the flow of bliss, free from all desire, and who is whose nature is *jagadānanda*. Now in the, both the Yogi… Of course basically the Yogi goes through the different state stages of bliss. And this is described in *Tantrāloka*, *Tantrasāra*, etcetera. But the highest stage of bliss is *jagadānanda*, that is cosmic bliss, universal bliss. So it is the Lord who has this universal bliss, and the devotee or the Yogi, when he attains to that state of *maheśvaratā*, he also enjoys the universal bliss. So starting from *nijānanda*, *nirananda* uh and so on. It goes through different stages, and every stage of bliss has its own *lakṣaṇa*, its own uh uh manifestation of that spiritual state. That is described in the *Tantrāloka*. But here it's the Lord who is described as of the state of *jagadānanda*. So again and again we have this integration of the world into the uh that divine consciousness. So *jagadānanda* means that universal or cosmic bliss, which becomes the state of the Yogi. 

*atha eva anuttara akula svarūpāt akārāt ārabhya śaktisphāra rūpa hakārānta pary antam yat viśvam prasṛtam*. And now that universe which flows forth from… And here I I must say something historical about Chatterji, because this is the first text he translated of Kashmir um Shaivism text. And here he was not yet aware of certain uh concepts. In the last text he translated was *Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa*. And uh if he had known at that time, then he would have translated it differently. Because here *anuttara akula svarūpāt akārāt*… And the whole Tantric uh reflection, meditation on language, on the alphabet… The letter *a*, short *a*, stands for the Absolute, *anuttara*. Unfortunately in the Latin language is it also starts with *a*. Well, it the English pronounce it *a*, but it is _absolutus_. So *anuttara*. And the letter *a* symbolizes *anuttara*. *Anuttara* means that absolute which has nothing beyond it. And *akula*. *Akula* which is uh not divided, not um free from differentiation. So from this state of absolute non- non-differentiated being, *anuttara akula svarūpa*, *svarūpāt*, which is symbolized by the letter *a*. Starting from that. And ending with the letter *ha*. Now this is the normal Sanskrit alphabet, from *a* to *ha*. Which is of the form of the expansion of energy, *śaktisphāra*. So it means *a* stands for the absolute, for *Paramaśiva*, and *ha* for *śakti*. And when you combine… and this is uh in Sanskrit there is a term for that, in the grammatical language. When you combine them, in between these two letters is the whole alphabet, means the whole language, and the whole reality, because if language and reality are coextensive. So *a* stands for *Śiva* and *ha* for *Śakti*. And then it concludes with uh *anusvāra* uh with the *bindu*, which comes concludes. And then you get the word *aham*. *Aham* which means I, that pure I-consciousness. *akāra hakāra pram iva saṃpūtīkāra*. *Saṃpūtīkāra* means uh combining them together, *Pratyāhāra*. Now *pratyāhāra* is not that yogic *pratyāhāra*, but it is the grammatical where you combine, you condense uh the letters. And at the end, in the form… it ends in the form of a *bindu*, of a dot. And that is *aham*. And… So this pure I-consciousness, which combines *Śiva* and *Śakti*. And, but at the end *anuttara eva viśramyati*. It rests. It comes to rest. And this whole language is condensated in this one word. It comes to rest in the Ultimate Reality. In the *anuttara*. In the Supreme Reality. So this *viśra*– *viśrānti* is such an important term. This coming to rest um… That means always that multiplicity or complexity coming into simplicity and into uh a peaceful state. It comes to rest, repose in the Absolute. So it means that whole manifestation from *Śiva* to *Śakti* to… *nara*… of course it doesn't say *nara* here, but it's implied, which is expressed in the whole of alphabet, whole of reality, ultimately comes to rest in *anuttara*, *viśramyati*. It is *śabdarāśi svarūpa eva ayam akṛt*– *akṛtako vimarśa*. And this is, well his translation: This natural *vimarśa*, or inward experience, is of the nature of *śabdarāśi*. Now *śabdarāśi* is the collection of words, which is identical with *Śiva*. Because there are two ways of describing the alphabet. One is *mātrikā*… Well, the three ways, but leave alone _mālinī_. Uh *mātrikā*. That is the *Śakti* aspect, is feminine also. And *śabdarāśi*, the collection of sounds, of words, of names, which is *Śiva*. So this whole um *vimarśa* here means meditative reflection on this uh unity of the universe and the language and the I-consciousness, *vimarśa*. That is *vimarśa*. And *akṛtaka* again, which is natural, which is not made, not uh artificial. Not artificial. And it is that collection of sounds which is identical with *Śiva*. 

So now this very complex subject, but I think just to give you the… Well, what he does is just to give you the gist uh… He could not leave it out, right? He could not leave it out, so he had to bring it at least at the end. And then he quotes um this verse by Utpaladeva from his *Ajadapramātrīśīti*, which is uh frequently quoted: 

> *prakāśasya ātmaviśrānti ahambhāvo’vikīrtitaḥ*
> *uktāc caiva viśrānti sarvāpekṣa nir*– uh *nirodhatāḥ*
> *svātantrya* *svātantryam* *atagartritvam* *mukhya* *īśvaratā’pic* *ca*

So that word *viśrānti* comes again and again. There's a beautiful article on *viśrānti* in that volume, *Samarasya*. Have you read it? No, you don't have it. Very beautiful uh… Yeah. *prakāśya* *prakāśasya* *ātmave* *prakāśasya* *ātmaviśrānti*. That pure I-consciousness, *ahambhāva*, is the resting place of the nature of light. Resting of all objective experience… I don't know why he says “objective.” Within oneself is what is meant by I feeling. Now *ahambhāva* he translates as I feeling, but… This resting is called sovereignty of will… Yeah, *svātantrya*. It is of primary du-ship, *gartritva*, and lordship, *īśvaratā*. Because of the cancellation of all relational consciousness, *sarvāpekṣa nirodhatā*. All relational or uh conditional consciousness. And of dependence on anything outside oneself. So this is resting in the pure I-consciousness. 

*eṣaiva ca ahaṃtā sarvamantāṇām udayaviśrāntisthānatvāt etat balenaiva ca tatra arthakriyākāritvāt mahatī vīryabhūmiḥ*. And this is that uh great state of uh… The Great Power, *vīrya*, which is that I uh consciousness, *ahaṃtā*. And which is the cause of all *mantras*. Of the arising and and uh setting of all *mantras*. That's why *mantravīrya*. So by *aham mantra*, that I-consciousness is called the power of *mantra*, *mantravīrya*. Because all the *mantras* arise and again set into that pure I-consciousness, *udayaviśrāntisthānatvāt*. By this power it is called the uh the state of power of all *mantras*, *mantravīrya*. And then he gives um a quotation from *Spanda Kārikā*. It doesn't matter, that one can always see *Spanda Kārikā*. All *mantras* are producing this power, etcetera. All these *mantras* are endowed with the nature of blissful mark of *Śiva*. This is uh… We don't need to go into the whole quotation of *Spanda Kārikā*. And then this verse, which I already quoted yesterday, or not worse… that _sūtra_ from the *Śivasūtras*: *mahārtha anusandhānāt mantravīryānupabhavaḥ*. By contemplation on on that great lake (bracket of consciousness)… There is the experience of the power of all *mantras*. It's a very beautiful _sūtra_, which of course requires meditation. And that great lake… And that lake, it's always a an image, you know? Many times meditation is also described with the diving. The diving into that lake. In the *Śivasūtra* itself… This another one. Now entrance of pervasion in um ab- absorption in that fullness. In that fullness of I-consciousness… that… *atra mahāmantravīryātmaka*– *kāyāṃ pūrṇahaṃtayām āveśaḥ*. Merging or absorption into that fullness of I-consciousness consciousness, which is of the nature of the power of the great *mantra*. *dehāprāṇādinimājanāt*. And uh by merging all this limited consciousness, identification with the body, with vital energy, with the mind, etcetera, *nimājanāt*. 

*atadavathambha saṃ*- *ṣṭa*- *ṣṭa*- *aṃbhenā dehādinām nila ādinām api tat rasa āpla*- *āplavanena tanmayīkaraṇam*. See there is a merging. By steadiness in the achievement of that state, and by immer- emerging in its essence, the experience of body, blue, etcetera. So even that this external um perceptions and internal um feelings, they are all immersed. That's why this great lake. They all immersed in that I-consciousness. *tadrasāplavanena*. By um making them, drenching them, or uh immersing them in that *rasa*, in that um essence. 

*tadā dehā sukādi uh sukhanīlādi yat kiṃcit pratate atya*- *avasīyate smaryate saṃkalpyate vā  तत्र सावत्रा एव भगवती चित् चितिशक्तिमय्येव यथा वित्तिभूता एव स्फुरति एव*. Then he has to insist that even the consciousness of body, प्राण, etcetera, it is not excluded, it is not suppressed, चित्तवृत्तिरोधा. There's no suppression, but it is in um in integrated in that total uh consciousness. And this is beautifully expressed here. And here everything… See, whatever is, whatever is manifested, again, see, प्रतते. Whatever is even superimposed, whatever is remembered, whatever is imagined. And that is why in this system we have this discussion, what is real, what is unreal. Even what you imagine, even what वेदान्त says, all this city of the गन्धर्व in the sky is something unreal. No, is also real, because you can imagine it. So, there's nothing unreal. Even संकल्‍पते, even what you imagine, that's again something for the artists. They live uh with imagination. What could they express otherwise? But, all this, in all these conditions and all these experiences, it is that चितिशक्ति, that power of pure consciousness, that great lady, whom क्षेमराज calls भगवती चित्तिशक्तिमयी, all these experiences, they consist of the same great lady, great goddess of consciousness, who is like the background, वित्तिभूता, uh she is like the screen that we had it in the beginning, that screen in the background of all these limited or partial experiences. But once you have made this experience of uh of that center, and you have approached that great lady, consciousness, directly, then even in your ordinary and limited experience, you know that this is that consciousness which is at the basis of everything which is manifesting in so many different ways. But, without losing that awareness of that consciousness in uh… well, I don't know whether it has anything to do with the आलविज्ञान in in Buddhism, but this is uh uh… certain interpretation may be different, but वित्तिभूता, she is that ground on which all experiences uh take place. 

So, I'm I'm a little bit skipping this page hundred and eleven, it goes on elaborating on this, and uh uh… But, all these different experiences… then we come to that sentence, page hundred and eleven, वस्तुतस्तु एकैवेव असौ चितिशक्ति:. In spite of all this manifold experiences and states of consciousness, in reality there is only one, and this is the power, the energy of consciousness. She is only the only one. And then he quotes from the प्रतिबिम्ब uh इश्वरप्रतिबिम्बकारिका। 

> या चैषा प्रतिभा तत्तत्पदार्थाक्रमारोहिता वृष्टा अक्रम आनन्दचित्रूपा परमात्मा समाहेश्वरा। 

This is beautiful verse. That he is translated “consciousness,” but well, consciousness is a word we use for so many things. But, here, the word is प्रतिभा। प्रतिभा means enlightenment, it means inside consciousness, um flash, flash of enlightenment, flash of inside. So, this is that प्रतिभा, that consciousness which flashes out in uh inside, which is colored by the succession of different objects. That one uh enlightenening experience, enlightening consciousness. And this is nothing other than the great lord, माहेश्वर, who is the highest knower, परमात्मा। अक्रम आनन्दचित्रूपा. Who is of the nature of successionless infinite consciousness. So, अक्रमा is um stressed for the lord, because we live in time, and our experiences are क्रमा। So we had this क्रमामुत्ता, but there, this of the very highest uh level. But, the consciousness of the lord is अक्रमा, is timeless, successionless. So, the objects, experiences of objects, is only like the coloring of that infinite light of consciousness which is colorless, which is um beyond differentiation, and that is प्रतिभा। 

Well, we'll make it… So, I'll try to skip some um maybe expansive explanations. So he goes on describing the differences of perceptions and experiences and states of consciousness, and brings it back… um I'm a little bit summarizing now. Brings it back on page hundred and twelve after this quotation, which I'm now um… Well, okay. Let us take it. मायाशक्त्या विभोश्चैव भिन्नसंवेदगोचराः कतिताज्ञानसंकल्पाध्यवसायादिनमपि। Now, it's important. So we have different names for knowledge: ज्ञान, संकल्पा, अध्यवसाय। And there are so many names in philosophy, etcetera. तो owing to the मायाशक्ति of the lord, she herself having to do with different knowables is called knowledge, ideation, resolution, and other names. अध्यवसाय… I wouldn't say resolution, is uh uh uh definitely um um… The resolution is not the best, no. It just escapes me. But, we have a dictionary here. अध्यवसाय is um determination, apprehension, but it's not, not the philosophical meaning. Philosophical meaning is a definite um… no. Determined, the determined uh knowledge. Something like that. So, all this uh knowledge, um ideation and अध्यवसाय, they are only different aspects of the same uh consciousness.  इवं ईशस्य सर्वथा तस्य असौ एकैव चितिशक्ति:. So, she is the only one power of consciousness in all states and in all aspects of knowledge. That is what he means here. तदा तदावेशात् पूर्वोक्ता युक्त्या कारणानुमिलनान्निमीलनक्रमेण  सर्वस्य सर्वमयत्वात् तत्तत्समाहारादा वापि सदा सर्वसर्गसहारकारी इत्थं सहजसंवित्तिर्देवताचक्रम्. Now, he comes to that, that देवताचक्र, that that cycle of energies, cycle of um… yeah, in the order of um unfolding and uh opening and closing of the senses. And that is related to सृष्टि and संहारा। So सृष्टि will… when the opening of the senses, संहारा that absorption, as the closing. And, because, everything is of the nature of everything else. Now here very briefly, he alludes to uh uh philosophical and spiritual um inside, which is most developed in the पारत्रिशिकविवरण।  सर्वं सर्वात्मकम्। That, everything is of the nature of everything else. So, every atom of the universe contains everything uh else, and uh so सर्वस्य सर्वमयत्वात्… So, also every state of consciousness contains uh all the other states, contains the consciousness in its entirety. सर्वस्य सर्वमयत्वात् . Because of everything being of the nature of everything else, even in the reabsorption of everything, whatever group of natural consciousness deities there is, in under the senses, which is ever projecting, ever withdrawing, over all this the highest योगिन् acquires lordship and पराभैरवर्शिप। This is the point. See, over all these uh manifestation of the senses and this creation and reabsorption, the… and it's definitely stressed, it's the highest योगि only who can have this experience, that that um lordship over the deities of the senses, or the शक्तित्‍स, including all external and internal uh experiences. इश्वरता, lordship। सांराध्यं, the uh… he becomes is like this चक्रवर्ती, चक्रेश्वर। पराभैरवात्मता। And here you remember स्वामि जी, again and again it is पराभैरव। At this… this is highest state. This पराभैरव, the supreme um form of शिव is पराभैरव। पराभैरवात्मता means the state or the condition or the the experience or the level of the supreme divinity, पराभैरवात्मता। तत्प्राप्ति, and attaining that… that that great योगिन्, परमयोगिना, he attains that state. Now, I am only looking at the watch. And so, I'm skipping that quotation.  And one can always, those who are uh familiar, they can… you can look at the *Spanda Kārikā*, and we have already, some of us have already done this *Spanda Kārikā* here… It's beautiful, but there… it… then on page 113 when it comes… Well, it is important of course, yeah. That to eka-… that this  sam- rūḍhā… establishing, fixing everything in one place. It is of a course an instruction for uh meditation or for practice. Fixing everything in one place means unifying everything in one act of consciousness, etc. Everything should be deposited into one place, that is into that consciousness power… *cit-samānya-spanda upa*- *spandabhūḥ*. Here again so many things are implied. In the… according to the *Spanda*, the doctrine of vibration. There are two aspects of vibration of consciousness: one is the universal vibration, *samānya-spanda*, which is underlying everything. Here again we come to modern physics. That everything, all the material uh… material or mental or spiritual, everything is ultimately of the nature of vibration. That is *samānya-spanda*, that's universal vibration. And this becomes particularized in particular uh acts of consciousness, particular objects, which is called *viśeṣa-spanda*. So the the objects and particulars are all uh specific forms of vibration. And the underlying, what is called this underlying ground of experience uh is the universal vibration, *samānya-spanda*. So and this universal vibration is *cit*, is the Absolute consciousness. 

Okay, I think we uh we come to the end, page 114. And then uh he becomes ecstatic! Kṣemarāja becomes absolutely ex- ecstatic at the end. Um hoping that he has also carried us along to that uh ecstasy. And he quotes himself, so it doesn't quote anymore *Spanda Kārikā* and so on. 

*svatantras cit* um *svatantras* uh *svatantraś-citti cakrāṇāṁ cakravartī maheśvaraḥ*. Here we have the *cakravartī*! *saṁvit-devatā cakra- juṣṭaḥ kopi jayati asau*. He who has become independent ruler, *cakravartī*, of the *cit-śakti*, of the power of consciousness, and who is the great lord, *maheśvaraḥ*. Being served… *saṁvit-devatā cakra-juṣṭaḥ*. He is being served by these goddesses of consciousness. So it is the reversal of the roles! Normally, _we_ are under the power of the these _śaktis_ uh… But _he_ becomes the *cakravartī*, he becomes the lord of these energies, and therefore they serve him. They come to serve him. There's some beautiful expressions like this, that all the *devatās* come to serve him very… *saṁvit*- *devatā* *cakra*- *juṣṭaḥ* *kopi* *jayati* *asau*. Only a rare being can reach that state of *cakravartī*, of *maheśvaraḥ*. It is… And now he gets this very two words of conclusion. He goes into complete ecstasy. *iti śivam*. See, *iti* means just quotation mark… *iti śabdaḥ upasaṁhāraḥ*. That means the conclusion. *yat eta-itāv*- *ad* *ukta-prakāraṇa-śarīram* *tac-chaivaṁ* *śivam*. See whatever has been explained in the body of this text, all this is *śiva*. Whatever he has in so many words, so many concepts, so many ideas… Whatever he has explained in this *prakaraṇa*… This *prakaraṇagrantha* is a a kind of text which gives you uh the summary of a whole system. All this is *śiva*. Because why? *śiva-prāpti-hetu-tvāt*. Because it is the cause of attaining *śiva*. Because it comes from *śiva*, *śivāt prasṛta-tvāt* *śivāt-prasṛ*. Because it flows from *śiva*. So the source of this whole text is *śiva*. *śiva-svarūpa*- *abhedatvāt*. And because it is not separate from the nature of *śiva*. That whole text itself is not separated from the nature of *śiva*. And because it consists of *śiva*, *śiva-mayaṁ eva*. Because it is… So the whole text when… *iti śivaṁ* here explains… because this nothing else but *śiva* in this whole text. And it is the cause of attaining that state of *cakreśvara*, *maheśa*- *tā*, etc. And this is… *iti śivam*. The conclusion. 

And then uh with this last uh… to this is actually the end, but then he has this two uh three verses of kind of summary. *dehāprāṇa-sukādi- vibhṛta-kālaṁ saṁvṛttyātmāno janaḥ pūrṇānanda-ghana- kanāṁ imāṁ na cinute maheśvarīṁ svāṁ citiṁ matye bodha-sudhāp- tiṁ viśvaṁ api tas-tat- phena-pindopam- am yat paśyet upadeśa- tas-tu kṛti sā sākṣāt sa ekaḥ śivaḥ*. Man, *janaḥ*, bound in all the phases of… Uh it's not waking and dream. But what is this *dehāprāṇa-sukha*… in all the phases of consciousness of body, vital breath, happiness, etc., does not recognize his own consciousness, *na cinute*. This is actually a synonym of *prativijñā*. Who does not recognize his own consciousness, which is *svāṁ citiṁ*, his own consciousness, which is full of the density of fullness of bliss, *pūrṇānanda-ghana*. And which is divine, *maheśvarīṁ*. That divine… who does not recognize his own consciousness. But he who… *matye bodha-sudhāpti*. Who owing to this instruction, *upadeśa*… *upadeśa tas-tu*. Owing to this instruction beholds in the ocean of the nectar of spiritual awareness the universe as a mass of its foam. So that uh ocean and the foam are the uh… again we have this comparison with the ocean. On all sides is said to be *śiva* himself… *matye bodha-sudhāpti*. And then *mati* is again uh stressed here, that the ocean of the enlightenment, of the center… *matiye bodha-sudhāpti*… of the… but the ocean of nectar, that we had… the second *maṅgala-śloka* was speaking about this ocean of nectar. And everything else, all the things in the universe, they are just like the the waves or the foam of that, produced by that ocean. And once he has recognized his true identity… *sākṣāt sa ekaḥ śivaḥ*. He is *śiva*. The one *śiva*. So why he stresses *ekaḥ śivaḥ*? Because in the uh dualistic systems, like *Śaiva-Śiddhānta*, it is said once he is liberated, he becomes *like* *śiva*. And then there are many *śivas*, many who are *like* *śiva*. But no, _he becomes_ *śiva* himself. So this is complete nondualism. 

*yeṣāṁ vṛttā śaṁkara* 115 *śakti-pāto ye anabhyāsāt tīkṣṇa- yukti- yuktiś- c-ayogyaḥ śaktāñjñātaṁ na īśvara uh prativijñā prativijñānaṁ uh muk- prativijñāna-muktasteṣāṁ eṣa tattva- upadeśaḥ*. There is a mistake: *tattvā* should be *dvitī*. This instruction in the truth has been given for those to whom has accrued the *śakti-pāta*, the descent of *śakti*, of *śivaś*… *śaṁkara śakti-pāta*. But who for want of the discipline of serious study are unfit for arguments. But that what he said in the beginning, uh who who cannot study all this philosophical um uh treatises. And are hence incapable of understanding the *īśvara-prati*- *vijñā* uh with its commentaries. So this is meant for those, but who have received that grace of the Supreme *Śiva*, *śaṁkara-śakti-pāta*. 

*iti śivam*. Oh, ok, Kṣemarāja. Well, let us finish completely. This *svātmīya-prativijñā*, he… the the last… yeah… 

*kṛtistatra bhagavān maheśvara- ācārya- vārya śrīmad-abhinavagupta- pāda- pāda- badu- badopā- badyopa- jīvinā*. This is very beautiful! This is very beautiful. *śrīmatorājanaka kṣema-rāja ācāryasya śubhamastu*. Now he first pays his homage to his guru, the great *ācārya* Abhinavagupta. By he means Kṣemarāja, _his_ disciple. He lives by the