## śivāya śatataṃ pañcakṛtyavidhāyine cānandavanaspātyāya paratparavibhāsiṃ namaḥ

śivāya śatataṃ pañcakṛtyavidhāyine cānandavanaspātyāya paratparavibhāsiṃ paramparāsthaṃ gahanādanādim ēkaṃ niviṣṭaṃ bahudhā guhāsu sarvālayaṃ sarvacaācaraṃsthaṃ tvāṃ ēva śambhuṃ śaraṇaṃ prapadye. 

This is Abhinavagupta's *maṅgalaśloka* to his *Paramārthasāra*, and uh, meaning is: with you, I take refuge in you alone, Śambhu, the transcendent, who are beyond the abyss, the beginning-less one, the one who has entered many caves. The cave stands for hearts. Though being one, you have entered many hearts. The abode of all and immanent in all animate and inanimate beings.

And this reminds me because *sarvālayaṃ*... I'm sorry to make a little Sanskrit uh note here. Yesterday, I heard some people saying we are going to Dharmalaya. Uh, I said, you know, if you pronounce it Dharmalaya, it means the dissolution of dharma, but it is *ālaya*, Dharmālaya. So you have to to make this long: Dharmālaya, the abode of dharma. Otherwise *laya* means the dissolution of dharma. It's just the opposite. 

So because here *sarvālaya*, he is the abode of everything. I have been asked to cut down on some part of the text so that we reach to the *vikāsa* stage, and I have been looking at the text, but it's not easy to cut down. It is such a compact and so many subjects are there. And um, it's difficult to leave out something. Maybe a section of a… But with each section, there's a whole uh, a bundle of topics which are important to the whole tradition, so I don't know how to cut it short.

But since, in the morning, we have a fresh mind, we can be a little more uh vigorous in our study. So, we ended, we uh yesterday with uh sūtra nine and in any case, makes it so brief, sometimes too brief. But we cannot leave out this subject. For example: Who is a *saṃsārī*? He is one who is covered with *malas*. *Malas*: impurity and um, imperfection, whatever. And this is due to the contraction of energy, the limitation of energy.

And afterwards, there comes one expression. I I wish those of you who know even a little Sanskrit to remember just a few words which are so special to this text. And one which is said afterwards… I shouldn't say now, but it says: A *saṃsārī* is one who is poor in *śakti*. *Śaktidaridra*. Who is poor in energy. That is the that is the characteristic of a *saṃsārī*. So, we had already um done this.

Now, what is the uh, the meaning of these three *malas*? You have a book here lying: “The Secret of the Supreme”, and there, brief chapters on every such subject, on the *malas* and the *tattvas*, etcetera. And here, [it] gives us a very brief uh summary of what are these impurities. 

And in the introduction introduction, I told you the difference between the dualistic Shaivism and the Shaivasiddhānta, and the non-dualistic is that in Shaivasiddhānta, they believe that these *malas* are something substantial uh sticking to the soul. And the, they are so substantial that you need uh… And they compare it with: suppose you have a cataract, and without an operation, you can't get back your proper eyesight. So, that operation is ritual and initiation and so on. So that's what the Siddhāntins believe. The *malas* are very substantially sticking to the soul. 

But in the non-dual system, they are not at all substantial. They're only a lack of… just a lack of something, but they're not at all substantial. So that's why by *jñāna*, by um understanding, by realizing their limitation, they can be overcome without a whole lot of ritual um…

So here he describes what are these *malas*. So we are on page 71, the commentary to nine: “Yatā cētātmaparameśvaraḥ svātantryāt abhedavyāptiṃ nimajya…” This we have already read. “…bhedavyāptiṃ avalambane avalambate tadā tadīyā icchā ādiśaktayaḥ asaṃkucitā api saṃkoc̣avatyaupanti.” So, although this supreme lord, who is of the nature of pure consciousness, *cētātma*. So, *svātantryāt*, out of his own very own freedom, he gives up, he abandons this, this pervasiveness of non-duality or non-separation. And he assumes, or he assumes a state of differentiation, *bhedavyāpti*. Then, his energies, will, etc., will, knowledge and activity, become limited, which are, in nature, unlimited. But they become limited or contracted, *saṃkoc̣avatyaupanti*. “Tadānīm ēvāyaṃ malāvitasamsāripavati.” Then, he becomes a *saṃsārī*, one who transmigrates, who is uh covered with um *malas*.

So, this already shows it is nothing substantial; it's just like a cloud covering the sun. It's only a veil and nothing uh substantial. “Tatā ca apratihatasvātantryarūpa um icchāśaktisaṃkucitāsati apūrṇamaṃnyatārūpaṃ ānavam malaṃ.” 

And now, I think I will write these three *malas*. So this is the subject which you find in all the Shaivatantras um, whether dualistic or non-dualistic. They all describe this *malas* because they need it for the negative descriptions are very necessary in order to overcome these limitations and to overcome these impurities. 

So, what is *āṇavamala*? Derived from *aṇu*. *Aṇu*, the limited individual. It is the limitation of the power of will of the lord, which consists in considering oneself as incomplete, *apūrṇamaṃnyatā*. So what we had yesterday, this word which I translated as “consumerism”, that um, *artha anugṛhā upa mukti*, or something like this. So, when you consider yourself as incomplete, you always strive to possess something or to make yourself complete by external um, adding something to yourself. And so this is that *āṇavamala* is the most um… everybody says, I mean, the masters say, this is the *mala* most difficult to overcome. Because until you reach that fullness, it will always be there. And that fullness can only be reached at the complete uh recognition, complete through the *vijñāna*. So, until that time, there will always be something lacking: *apūrṇamaṃnyatā*. This *āṇavamala*, the limitation of the individual. Individuality. So the very fact of considering oneself an individual, a limited being, is a sign of this *āṇavamala*. 

Then, the limitation of the power of knowledge, *jñānaśakti*. “…kramena saṃkoc̣āt…” by by gradually limiting that. And, “…sarvajñatvatvasya kiṃcitjñatvāptir…” that omniscience of the lord becomes the power limited of limited knowledge: knowing. We know something, but we don't know everything. So, how is it… I mean, the Buddha is *sarvajña*. So, a completely enlightened being has the same power as the lord, that is omniscience. Omniscience does not mean uh… I mean, there are so many texts and discussions about what it means. It doesn't mean [me] mean knowing all the details of the world, but knowing everything in its very essence, in its very uh completeness. So, what we limited beings are, we have this limited knowledge. And even if the most greatest genius uh, cannot cover the whole uh, whole of knowledge, unless he is enlightened. And this is based on the inner organ, on the intellect, etcetera, etcetera.  “…Antaḥsaṃkoc̣agrahane na…” which becomes more and more uh contracted. And which perceives, “…bhinnavedyapatā…”, perceives objects separately. Perceiving objects or things in separation, that is the sign of *māyīyamala*. That *mala* which depends on the obscuring power, which is on the level of the *tattvas*. No, it's the highest, but it is the, the power of obscuration. And this consists in perceiving things separately. You cannot have a vision of unity, but of separation: *Bhinnavedya*.  

*Bhrata*, and *kriyāśakti*, the power of activity of the Lord, gradually, “…kramaṇābhede sarvakartṛtvasya kiñcitkartṛtvam āpte…” um, gradually losing the power of, of all-doership, or omni… omnipotence. I don't like that word. It sounds like a um, a king or something. But omni… all-doership, or any other word for that: *Sarvakartṛtva*. Or how is it translated? Mm mm… No, no… “omnipotence” translates it as “omnipotence”. Uh… *sarvakartṛtva*, and becomes limited, and becomes um the activity limited to um, limited activity, limited actions, *kiñcitkartṛtva*. We can do something. We cannot do everything. Or we can… Of course, we are also limited by space-time, etc., *bhrata*. But this is the limitation of the *kriyāśakti* of the Lord. And this is this also… Sorry. Connected with the um, organs of action, *karmendriya*. So we have the… we have under that first, the five organs of action… Yes, yes, yes. *Icchāśakti*. *Icchāśakti* is connected with *āṇava*, and um, *māyā*… *māyā mala* is connected with *jñānaśakti*, and *kriyāśakti* is connected with *karma mala*. And this ultimately um, if you have limited activity, leads, of course, in all the Indian systems to an accumulation of *karma*, which um is precisely that which makes you unfree. And is that which makes you do good and bad things. “…śubhāśubhānaṣṭhānamāyāṁ karmamalam.” This is the limitation or the impurity of activity, makes you do good and bad things um, activities and limited activities.

And and he summarizes that on page 72, 72, the last two lines in Sanskrit: “Tathā sarvakartṛtvaṁ sarvajñātṛtvaṁ um apūrṇatvaṁ nityatvaṁ vyāpakatvaśaktayā saṁkocaṁ gṛhṇā kṛ kṛṣṇānā yathākramaṁ kalāvidyārāgakālaniyatirūpatayā bhānti.” Now he makes it too brief. We'll come to this. “Tathāvidhaccayāṁ śaktidaridratā saṁsāre ucchate.” And such a *saṃsārī*, such a one who is bound to the world of transmigration, is poor in energy, *śaktidaridratā*. I like this expression. Because we have lost all these energies, which are also our very own. But we have reduced them so much that we are… we are impoverished. Our power is impoverished: *śaktidaridratā*. 

Now, in, in one sentence, he alludes to the theory of the *kañcukas*. Now, you, you have it on your list of *tattvas*. These are added to the *tattvas* of Sāṅkhya, and they constitute what Professor Tauler calls the “borderline” between uh what constitutes the individual being, and the individual being, which is a contraction of the universal being. And this contraction is uh, happens in five. And there are different lists. So we are not go… we cannot go into the details, otherwise Raj will be after me to make it still shorter. But uh, at least we have to mention. He says here: *kalā*, *vidyā*, *rāga*, *kāla*, and *niyati*. Now, *kalā* is a limited creativity. This is agency, but limited creativity. *Vidyā* is limited knowledge, limitation of knowledge. *Rāga*, limitation of um attachment. Means you, you, the, the infinity of the universal love becomes reduced to a particular attachment. *Kāla*, limitation of time. *Niyati* uh… limitation of um… Yeah, *niyati* is very difficult to translate. It is mostly often translated as “fate”, but uh, it means also limitation of possibility. Like um, it is also limitation of space, but not only of space.

Now, these uh *kañcuka*, literally means a kind of uh something which covers the body, um, what the soldiers wear to this uh, anti-bulletproof… bulletproof vest or something. But it also means uh for example, the skin of an elephant, the skin of a snake. So it is something which both protects and separates. And um it, it limits, and it has also a protective function. But that protection is also a limitation. He translates it a- as “cuirass”, but that is only understandable for people who know French or something. Um, “cuirass”, how to translate it in… “Armor”, yes! Armor is… Yeah. 

And what this uh, Tauler does in this article, is precisely to show that the *kañcukas* are not only negative. Because until we are fully uh, or until we are become universal, all our energies become universal, we need this protection. This, in our… we need uh… I mean, we cannot be infinite in space and time and so on, until we have not reached that uh enlightenment. So, these um *kañcukas* are also related to the divine powers. Um that omni-doership, *sarvakartṛtva*, related to *kalā*, the limited agency, limited crea- uh creativity, and omniscience, *sarvajñātva*, related to the limited *vidyā*, and fullness, *pūrṇatva*, is related to limitation in *rāga*, attachment. It's, it just the opposite. And all-pervasiveness, *vyāpakatva*, this is the important characteristic of the divine. What we try to practice on the hill yesterday, with this *ākāśa*, because it's *ākāśa* which is *vyāpaka*. So, if you meditate on *ākāśa*, you slowly get identified with that all-pervasiveness, that pervasiveness. And that pervasiveness is um limited in *niyati*, in the *kañcuka niyati*. But I am sorry, we cannot go deeper into this subject. And those who are interested can uh read that article. It's very important for, for both the psychology and… yeah. It is a theme of the spiritual psychology, I would call it.

So, this kind of *saṃsārī* who is covered with these three *malas*, and these five *kañcukas*, he is poor in *śakti*. But he already gives us hope for the future in that one sentence: “Svaśaktivikāsetu śiva eva.” But on the expansion of that energy, he is nothing but Śiva. He is Śiva himself. So, that same energy which is here uh limited and uh contracted, on that expansion, then he leads us there. We will come in sūtra 17 to that *vikāsa*. And on that expansion uh, you are Śiva himself. 

Then introduction to 10… Oops! Sorry. Now comes that intermediary… See, first you think, “Oh, everything is so limited, and there's no hope of getting out of this *saṃsāra*, with its *malas* and *kañcukas* and so on.” But then he a- already consoling. He says no. Even then, just like Śiva, he performs the five actions, five acts. “Tathāpi tattvat pañcakriyā ni karoti.” Even that individual who is not yet universal, performs the five acts. Now, why he gives so much importance to now the individual version of the universal five acts of Śiva. And this belongs to… On the beginning, maybe we just mentioned only the different Tantric traditions. So one is *krama*. And um, *krama* has to do with the dynamism of consciousness, which is experienced in all the sense experiences, so that every sense experience is transformed into a divine, or is a divine energy. And so the awareness of what is going on with our sense experience, is a participation in that divinity of the senses, is the *karaṇeśvarīs*. And uh, two aspects he speaks of two asp-… One is the… when the senses are externalized, *vahirmukhi*. Then it is uh the exoteric aspect of the sense experience. And then, there is an esoteric sense experience: experiencing them as divine powers. And they are called *karaṇeśvarīs*, the goddesses of the senses. So, transforming the pure sense experience into that divine um a- a- experience of the divine senses is the process of *krama*. Now here maybe we have to… How he relates the five acts of Śiva to our own experience, both external and internal. External is what every uh conscious being is doing; internal is what the *yogī* or the meditator uh does, then who becomes aware [of] what is happening in his sense experience. 

So, the introduction to… First 10: Athos samsāriyas  avasthāyām asyā kiṃcit śivata ucyate tan abhijñānam asti yena śiva eva tathā avasthitaḥ? Question: Very nice. In that case, well, is there any mark appropriate to *śiva*, to the *śiva* state, by which the self, even in the *saṃsārin* state, may be considered as Śiva himself appearing in that condition? It is declared: there is. *Tat api*, even in this condition, he does the five, the acts like him. And then, he quotes the  *svachandā  tantra*: “sṛṣṭi-saṃhāra-kartāraṃ vilayasthiti-  kārakam śrī anugrahakaraṃ devam praṇatā praṇatārti-vināśanam.” So, I bow to that divine who brings about uh emancipation, reabsorption, concealment and grace, maintenance, and who dispenses grace, and who destroys the affliction of those who have bowed down to him. This is uh from the *Svacchanda Tantra*.  “Iti śrīmad anandi… Yatā ca bhagavān  su-tetara athavā sphāraṇakamenā sva-rūpa-vikāsa-rūpāṇi sṛṣṭyādīni karoti tatā saṅkucita-cit-śakti-maya śakti-tayā saṃsāra-bhūmikāyām api pañcakriyāṇi vitatya et…” So, just as the Lord, by the process of expansion,  *svarūpa-vikāsa*… so you retain already this expression, which will come then from sūtra 17 onwards, *svarūpa-vikāsa*. The expansion of his essential nature brings about *sṛṣṭi*, etcetera. In this way, that *tā*, even so, even that limited being in the condition of *saṃsāra*, by limiting his consciousness power, *saṅkucita-cit-śakti-tayā*, by limiting his consciousness power,  *saṃsāma*… *saṃsāra-bhūmikāyām api*, even in the state of *saṃsāra*, he performs these five acts.  Uh and this is in the *Īśvara-pratyabhijñā-kārikā* from of Utpaladeva.  “Tad evam vyavahāre'pi prabhu dehādi dehādy-āviṣan prāptaṃ śiva antar-arthau arthaukam iccayā ābhāsayet bahi…” This being the position even in the empirical state, *vyavahāra*, the Lord, entering into the body, etcetera, causes the objects to appear outwardly by his will to appearing within himself: *bahir ābhāsayet bahi*, he manifests them outwardly. So, here's the question of the external um experience with the senses.  *Bahi-mukhatā*. So, again, the subject is not the… I know… The subject is the Lord. He assumes the body. He assumes the body, and he becomes limited. So, he enters the sphere of the body, *prāṇa*, etcetera. Um, when the attention becomes external and makes objects like blue, etcetera, appear in definite space-time… Then he's referring to the appearance in definite space-time, etcetera. Is his act of *sṛṣṭi*. So, what happens in the sense perception, external, when you observe something with any sense organ? That is the act of emanation, the act of creation. And then, when your attention… your is um moved to some- something else, so that sense perception gets dissolved. That is *saṃhāra*. Uh, suppose you see something, and then you go- you see something else, or you atten- you pay attention to sound, or something else; that is *saṃhāra* of that particular sense perception. And then, the continuity of an appearance. You are… You go on looking at something. That is uh *sthiti*. That is continuous… continuation. And, with reference to its appearance as different, “bhedena ābhāsaṃśe vilayaḥ,” that is obscuration.  Uh this is important, uh considering something as different. That is the sign of obscuration, or uh, *vilaya*. Uh, um…  That means you don't see the thing as it is. That is creating it.  But, if you see it as something else, as something different, or some illusory perception, that is a *vilaya*. That is the power of obscuration, which we are constantly… I mean uh, constantly engaged in this uh projecting something which is not there, projecting… mhm. *Saṃhāra*, then… mhm. *Saṃhāra* is… *Saṃhāra* is uh… well, moving your attention from one uh sense perception to another. That's what the… “anya-deśa-kāla- ādy-ābhāsaṃśe asyasyā anarthitā…” Moving it to some other space-time, or… so, just you move away from that particular sense perception, and then it is destroyed. It's dissolved. Yeah. Dissolved. For instance, mhm. It is here now, sense perception. Is not thought. It's not thought. No, no, no.  This is really sense perception. And what is dissolved? Mhm. What is dissolved? What is dissolved? No. What is dissolved? Is uh, suppose I, I, I look at a flower, and then I'm distracted, or I, I look at something else. So, for my sense perception, that flower gets uh… it's removed from my perception. It's not… the flower doesn't get destroyed, but, but my perception of it. So, this is the very ordinary um, external… but, there is another way of perceiving things, and that is the… Page 75. The second *pada* in Sanskrit and in the middle uh in the translation: “Evam idam pañca-vidha-kriyā-kāritvam ātmanyam sadā tṛtīya- pratipatyā pariśīlyamānam maheśva- maheśvaryam unmīlaya- unmīlayati eva praktibhajanam.” With reference to the appearance of everything is identical with the light of consciousness… No, come again. Where is this? This… Sorry, sorry. So, it is in the third line, third line of the Sanskrit. Um, “prakāśaikyena prakāśane anugrahī tritā.” The state of grace is consists in um perceiving things as identical, as one, with that light of consciousness. “Prakāśaikyena prakāśane anugrahī tritāvaḥ.” As we have said when we talked about the five acts, that the ultimate aim of all the four acts is grace. And that grace consists in perceiving everything in oneness with that light of consciousness. Whatever you have uh perceived or dismissed, or changed your perception, and so on and so on, in the other four acts; then, you perceive it in that light, in the unity of consciousness, unity of the light of consciousness; that is the act of grace. And, this is very beautiful, because all the uh distraction which is there in sense… external sense perception; once you make it merge, or you experience it as one with that light of consciousness; that is grace. And, that can happen in any phase of the sense perception, in any phases, even when you are deluded. That's why they say even uh you, you have some wrong impression abou- but, if it is suddenly, you are made aware of that unity of… with the light of consciousness, then that delusion also becomes grace.  Thus, this… I'm not reading the… but it's uh… “Ātmanyam sadā tṛtīya-pratipatyā pariśīlyamānam maheśva -ryam unmī- unmīlaya- un- unmīlayati eva praktibhajanam.” Thus, this authorship of the fivefold act occurring within one's own personal experience, if pursued steadily… Yesterday, we had uh this *pariśī- pariśīlana*… if pursued steadily with firm understanding, *tṛtīya- pratipatyā*, reveals the Lord's greatness to the devotee. “Unmīlayati bhaktibhajanam maheśvaryam.” So, even in the sense perception, but, it needs a firmness of… *tṛtīya-pratipatti*, firm understanding, and to cultivate that. It's not… we always have sense perceptions, but we don't do anything with it. We don't use them for this uh uh grace.  So, for this, we need this firmness of… *pratipatti* is more than understanding. Uh, do you know some-… I don't have the dictionary here, but um, *pratipatti* is very important. Any Sanskrit scholar with some other uh, translation?  And, “anuśīlanā pariśīlanā pariśīlyamānam…” So, every aspect of the practice has to be followed, has to be cultivated, has to be practiced; and uh, practicing means with the awareness, constant awareness. And uh, and then, if you are firmly established, then this, the greatness of *maheśvara* becomes manifest, becomes revealed. *Unmīlaya- unmīlaya-*…  That even in all those acts of simple… apparently simple sense perceptions, it is his greatness which is manifest as beautiful… “Ataivā yeṣāṁ tā ete pañcavilāśāḥ sthite…” *paricīlana* is very important. “…Pariśīlaya yānti te svarūpa-vikāśamayam viśvam jñātvā jīvanmuktaḥ iti…” *iti āṁ nātha*… So now, this is the great… and therefore, those who always ponder over this… ponder of… reflect or practice or cultivate this *paricīlana*…  “…paricīlaya yānti…”, knowing the universe as an unfoldment of the essential nature of consciousness, become liberated in this very life: *jīvanmukti*.  *Svarūpa-vikāśamayam viśvam jñānā*…  Those who know that this universe is nothing but an unfoldment, an expansion of the essential nature… Now in bracket, you can see: “of consciousness”, or “of the divine”, or a… So this universe is not something which distracts you, but is something which… it is a path to realize that uh unfoldment, the, the expansion of the essential nature: *svarūpa*. *Svarūpa* is a very simple term, but it is so loaded with… what is our real being, what is our true essence, which is the true being of the divine: *svarūpa vikāśamayam viśvam*. So the universe is not something which distracts us, but something which reveals that very *svarūpa*, that very nature. And recognizing and practicing, paying attention to this means… leads to *jīvanmukti*, to liberation in life, nothing less.

So, we come to sūtra 11, introduction to sūtra 11. “na ca ayam eva prakāraḥ pañcabhir atikramya kāryāḥ tve yāvat anyopi kaścicchrahasyarūpo'sti.” So, there is not… not only this way of uh, the, the authorship of the five acts, if we pay attention to our normal sense perceptions, but there is another, more esoteric way, *rahasyarūpa*, *rahasyarūpo*, esoteric way of understanding. And this is in the following sūtra: “Āpāsanā raktir vimaraśanā bījāvasthāpanā vilāpanaḥ tāni…” These are the five esoteric aspects of the five acts in Sanskrit there. So, what are these in esoteric sense? *Āpāsanā* means “making manifest”, *raktir* is “attachment”. So, making manifest, that corresponds to *sṛṣṭi*. *Raktir* is a- attachment, which corresponds to *sthiti*, to uh continuation. *Vimaraśanā* is reflective awareness, which corresponds to *saṃhāra*. The *saṃhāra* is something very positive. Um, we have already talked about it, but… *bījāvasthāpanā* is establishing a seed, or uh depositing a seed, corresponds to obscuration or veiling. And *vilāpana*, dissolving, corresponds to grace, *anugraha*. Manifesting, relishing, experiencing itself, settling of the seed, dissolution. So now, you have an alternative translation. Now, these are terms of the *grammar* system, the esoteric aspects of the five um acts. Mhm. 

Could you please… could you repeat what corresponds to what?

The… yes. So, *Āpāsanā* um, manifesting, corresponds to creation. *Raktir*, attachment, corresponds to continuation, *sthiti*. *Vimaraśanā*, reflective awareness, corresponds to *saṃhāra*. The *saṃhāra* is something very positive um… we have already talked about it, but… *bījāvasthāpanā* is establishing a seed or uh, depositing a seed, corresponds to obscuration or veiling. And *vilāpana*, dissolving, corresponds to grace, *anugraha*. 

“…Durgādidivīprasaraṇakrameṇa…” So, the… all these goddesses… they are not something external, kept in a temple, but they are the goddesses in our own body, in our own um, sense organs. So these goddesses… So, this is actually not the ordinary uh perception, but this is the perception of *yogīs*. See, whatever…  An object being emanated means being brought forth into appearance… without shutting the eye, relish it for some time… it is maintained and experienced till then by the goddess of maintenance. And this relishing of the experience for some time represents *sthiti* or maintenance. It is withdrawn at the time of *vimarsa*, reflection, for which another word is “sudden flash of delight”.

Now, let us look at the Sanskrit: “yathā prasādanimeṣam kāñcit kālam rajyate tṛtīyasthitiḥ tasyāḥ sthitiḥ divyā tat sthāpyate camatkāra aparaparyāya-vimaraśanā-samaye saṁhriyate.” Now, *camatkāra* is such a beautiful term. It is both in aesthetic experience and a mystical experience. It is some sudden, delightful… as blissful uh flash which makes you full of wonder, full of astonishment. And those who have done the *Śiva Sūtra* last year uh, we have this sutra: “vismayayogabhūmikāḥ”. The stages of yoga are full of wonder. So, unless… that is a sense of wonder you have not progressed in yoga. That every new stage is a surprise, is a wonder. It's not… even if you have read it, or you have heard it from your *guru*, unless you experience it yourself, you can't uh feel that surprise, *camatkāra*. And something which is uh… Here we have many uh artists and people who are working in the field of aesthetics, that according to Kashmir Śaivism, the aesthetic experience is not something which leads you away from that central, but on the contrary, it, it gives you a flash of insight into that which then, in mystical experience, on the… becomes established. That, that's why here, *camatkāra* is uh very important. 

So, that amazement now, and *saṃhāre*… there, by it, it gets dissolved. Because you are moving from extroversion to introversion. And in introversion, you know, things get dissolved in, in your inner uh being. See, that what you have perceived, you have created also externally, then you have this flash of um experiencing that delight, and that flash itself makes you introverted. So, everybody who has… you may do it in nature, you may do it with music, or with any… anything which leads you to that. So, that external sense perception gets dissolved; that's why the connection between *saṃhāra* and uh *vimaraśanā*, it is that introversion, and that… it's… that's why *saṃhāra* is such a positive… such a beautiful term. It reaches its own uh concentrated state. And it's, it doesn't get lost, but it is concentrated. *Saṃhāra* uh… *camatkāra samhāre*. It is very uh interesting quotation he gives here, all of a sudden. “Samādhivajreṇa api anyair abhedyo bhedabhūtatā parāmṛṣṭas cānaṣṭas ca tvadbhaktivālaśālibhiḥ…” he says, “śrīrāmamebhiḥ…” This is a quotation from *Yogavāsiṣṭha*, because often when Rāma says… So, “Peter Buddhara…” this mountain of differentiation, it is so difficult to overcome, but we are so much in this uh multiplicity, separation, differentiation… “Peter Buddhara…”, this mountain of differentiation… “…samadhi vajrena abhi…” which cannot be uh overcome even by the thunderbolt of *samādhi*, of meditation, of, of trance, yogic trance. So, that mountain of uh differentiation. But, “…para anṛṣṭasya naṣṭasya vat…”, it, it gets dissolved by… for those who are endowed… “…tat bhakti balaśālibhi…”, it… for those who are endowed with devotion, with the, the power of devotion to you. So here, it is not the *yogic samādhi* which can overcome, but it is that state of uh, the power of devotion, power of love, which can make this mountain of difference, this mountain of uh separation uh… can destroy it, can overcome it. 

The amount of differentiation, which cannot be split by others even by the thunderbolt of *yogic trance*, by those were endowed by the power of devotion to you, it is destroyed by being dissolved. So here suddenly, I mean, this is not a text of *bhakti*, but you know, suddenly, you know this. And even in the Tantras themselves, then suddenly the *bhakti* becomes uh, the most important, more important than *yoga*. And this, of course, the Utpala Devas part is also that *bhakti* and *jñāna*, neither *yoga* not *Tantra*. It's interesting. You won't find in *Īśvara-pratyabhijñā-kārikā* uh, much of *Tantra*. But uh, *bhakti* is most important because it can dissolve this hardness of that multiplicity which enmeshes us into the *saṃsāra*, etcetera.

Where's this quote from?

Yeah, well, that's uh… he says: “*śrī ramena*”, this, by Rāma. But there's no quotation given, but often, such um phrases refer to *Yoga Vasiṣṭha*. But he has not given an um reference, so it may not have been found, but probably *Yoga Vasiṣṭha*. This is a beautiful text.

So let's try to finish this… Yeah, but he has not finished all this uh five phases. “yathā tu samharayamānam api etad anta vicitra asaṅkādi saṁskāram ādadate tadā tat punaḥ utpaviśyat saṁsāra bīja bhāvam āpannam vilaya padam atyāropitam.” Now, what can happen, that even if you have already… Because *saṃhara*, it comes before *vilaya* and *anugraha*. *Sṛṣṭi*, *sthiti*, *saṃhara*, then *vilaya* and *anugraha*. So even if you have already dissolved that um in uh, in this kind of *saṃhara*, by *saṁskāra*, by this uh wonder uh being wonderstruck by this experience, but still there remains a seed, something which is not completely uh dissolved. And that remains as a seed, and that becomes again the seed of *saṃsāra*, and that is *vilaya*, *vilaya*, the obscuration. Because that has not been completely dissolved. So, something… some small seed… There are so many… you know, all this yoga… *Yoga Vasiṣṭha*, so many stories about yogīs who have reached [a] very high state, but still they, they have fallen down, and they had to be reborn and uh, because some *bīja* was left which led them again to *saṃsāra*. So, this, this is very common in the um, in the tradition of yogīs, that until you have completely merged, there are some seeds remain, and this is *vilaya*, this is obscuration. 

But “saṁsāra bijam atyāropitam… yathā punas tatra antasthāpitam anyatvā anubhuyamanam eva hata pāka kramena alam grāsa yuktyā cit agni sat bhāvam āpatti tadā pūrṇatā āpādanena anugṛhyate eva.” Now, this… these are very technical terms, but very beautiful… “On the other hand, while it…”, that is, “the world…”, is being held inwardly, “…and anything else that is experienced at that…”, dying, “…if it is burned to sameness with the fire of consciousness…” This is [a] beautiful expression: *cit agni*, *cit agni sat bhāvam*. Now, this consciousness is not something very uh neutral. It is a fire! It is a powerful fire, and unless everything is burned to sameness with that fire of consciousness… It is not something very soft and uh… But it is powerful, like a fire which burns uh everything to sameness: *cit agni sat bhāvam*. 

And this… by what process? And there are two names are mentioned with *saṃhara*, very technical terms. One is called *alaṁ grāsa*, and *hata pāka*. And *alaṁ grāsa*… Now, this is described in *Tantrāloka* by Abhinavagupta, but we can only translate it without going into uh, the technicality. *Hata pāka* means… Well, you know *hatha yoga*. So that *hatha* is something uh sudden and very powerful, and um, very intense. So, intense uh maturation. *Pāka*, *pāka* means you, you cook something um, or you, you make something mature: that, that is your *karma*, or whatever. And *hatha*, with… with powerful um, with a powerful method.  *Hata pāka* is, is a technical term, but um, by the process… Now, he has uh, of course… J… there's a… he has a note on these terms… note hundred and… hundred and one. Hmm. It uh, page hundred forty that he has a note. So, two ways by means of which an object of experience is brought to sameness with the real essence of consciousness. There's *śānti*, *praśama*, and *hata pāka*. So, *śānti* is of course, [the] gradual, peaceful way, and *hatha* is an intense way. But I don't like his translation: “persistent process”. Not persistent, it is sudden! And *alaṁ grāsa* is the other um… *Alaṁ* means “complete”, and *grāsa* means “swallowed, swallowed completely”, complete swallowing. So, fully, perfectly, when no impression or germ of *saṃsāra* is separate from consciousness, is allowed to remain. This uh, very correct, because the problem was that no *bīja*, no, no seed should remain which leads to another uh birth in uh, new *saṃsāra* existence, in *saṃsāra*. So, both these terms refer to processes, Tantric processes, which are very powerful, very intense, and they are intended to burn this… all these traces in the fire of consciousness, *cit agni*. “…tadā pūrṇatā āpādanena anugṛhyate…”, and that is grace. That is the attainment of fullness, *pūrṇatā*. And *pūrṇatā* can be only if there's no… no trace must be left, otherwise, it's not full. If… If something is uh incomplete, something is uh not digested… This… one, which you… you used to use that expression, “You have to digest it.” So, this uh um… it's not enough if, if your food is not digested, then you will um get some uh disease. But in the same way, our experiences have to be fully digested so that this fullness remains: *pūrṇatā*, and this is the act of grace. 

“…ityasya ca pañcavidha kṛtyakāritvam sarvasya sadā sannihita tam api tat guru upadeśaṁ vinā na prakāśate.” So, this is the problem. You need a guru! This is a process of… See, everybody goes through this process of these five acts, but without the instruction of… “sanhitam api”… without the instruction of a *sadguru*, it is difficult to experience this. “…sadguru upadeśaṁ vinā na prakāśate.” And that is why it is *sadguru*…  *Sadguru sa bhāryayaiva etad prathamārtham anu sa anu sad bhārya*… Therefore, you should resort to a true master. These things I can explain in words… I mean, generally, I say um I I I can also repeat the same… you… can explain it in words, but to experience it, you need a *sadguru*. And uh, at certain points, both Abhinavagupta and other authors also, they explain many things and so on, and they say, “Well, ultimately, to experience it, you have to go to a *sadguru*.” So…  But the text can give us uh… I say it's like a, like a uh… you have a map of the Himalayas. It's wonderful to look at this map, but unless you have a guide to show you the path, uh, the map alone will not uh be sufficient. So that this um… the *sadguru* is necessary. “…na prakāśate.”

So we'll just uh read this sūtra 12 anyhow. It is very uh… It is not so short. Here, page 101. See, the process to which we are being led… Now I'm just introducing that sūtra, and which we are going to listen to at uh 11 o'clock, to that sūtra… The process to which we are being led is this divinization of the sense experience… Not only senses, but the, the body is an embodiment of the divine, and every aspect of… even the sense experience is a aspect of the divine. And so, all the… Yeah, he comes to the divinization of our whole existence, which, at the end of… he gives this very short quotation: “śarīri parameśvara.” Even in the body, they are the supreme lord.

So, I think this… we'll have to do it in the afternoon. And then uh I think then we'll try to come to sūtra 13. Just the introduction to sūtra 12. “yasya punaḥ sadgurūpadeśaṁ vinā etat prajñānaṁ nāsti tasya avacchadita svarūpa svasvarūpa svasvarūpābhi nijābhi śaktibhir vyāmohitaṁ bhavatī.” He… whoever who does not acquire the complete knowledge owing to the lack of guidance from a good *guru*, remains deluded by his own powers since the real nature of everyone is concealed, remains… *nijaśaktibhi*… See, our own energies can also be deluding. That's why the necessity of the *sadguru*. But in the explanation to this sūtra, he will lead from that delusion to that uh divinization:  “…that aparajñāne svaśaktibhir vyāmohitā saṁsāritvam.” So, we are eagerly waiting for the moment he gets out of that state of *saṃsāra*, but um, he describes it in such great detail because it's uh… then the state of liberation is just… just the opposite! Just you turn it… *aparajñāna*, *parājñāna*… *aparajñāna* is again… also uh… And recognition of full knowledge… 

So, we'll come to the commentary in the afternoon, if you want to ask some questions or… Maybe I didn't uh do it very literally, this… Because… Sorry…  “…saṁniditam api no…” at the end of this uh commentary on 11,  “…sanītāmapi sadgurūpadeśaṁ vinā…”, although it is always near, it… it is always near to us, this experience is so near to us, but unless it is pointed out to us by a *sadguru*, we are not aware of it. We don't become aware…  

Uh I'm just trying to find it in the text uh when the… where it says uh d-d-d… the grace, where it calls the “light of consciousness”. What's the characteristics of… like, how do you… how do they define “light of consciousness”? Is it like “luminosity” in Buddhism? Is [it] like this receptivity, the ability to… yeah. I don't know. Yeah, because its grace… they call it “grace”, and they call it “light of consciousness”. And it seems like when it's described as the fifth of the… the Shiva's gestures or acts, it seems like at least when I'm reading… It might be my misunderstanding, but it seems like the grace is the portal. That's… yeah. And so, “light of consciousness”… could you say something about that at some point? Maybe you're saying something about it all the time… I know. But, do they have any specific places or how to define it? Any specific… specific ways of characterizing it? Like, is it like luminosity…? Like because it seems like the manifestation, emanation, which is the first act, that's like flowing towards the object, but this is like flowing towards the light source itself, the grace? Or, that's my… my feeling of it, when it said… Is that… 

Yeah, I'm… I don't… I'm asking something about… could you unfold “light of consciousness”, what it means? 

Yeah, I mean uh… 

You mean the, the practical experience of the…? 

Yeah, how do you, right now, in this moment, see the “light of consciousness”? 

Yeah, I think that… Yeah, grace is precisely… Mhm. This uh… But here, there is uh… there is a relationship between… Something you can do, is this *hathayoga*, I mean, the intensity of total uh… the, the… by… yesterday, maybe I… yesterday… that intensity of your desire and that intensity of your practice is also a condition. Is *hathayoga* and *alaṁgrāsa*. It is not automatic, you have to do something. And then, this uh burning into that fire uh, *citagni*, complete burning into that fire of consciousness is a very powerful act. 

Mhm.

And of course, the guru can uh be uh great help. But here, at the end, he says all this is… without… without the help of a guru, is very difficult to experience. But some people, they have that experience even without a guru. Um, but they must be very mature, and very uh highly advanced. Think of a Ramana Maharshi, you know, he had this sudden… That was also [a] kind of *samatkāra*, but the sudden, you know uh… And everything getting burnt in that fire of consciousness. Uh, [he] didn't have any guru, but it just happened to him. 

But uh that's not an answer, but just… 

It's interesting that uh… well, there's a whole chapter on, on *śaktipāta* in the *Tantrāloka* by Abhinavagupta, and uh, normally uh chapter means… describes the guru and different stages, different grades of guru. So mostly, the guru is initiated by his predecessor, and so that is passed on through the ritual, *ācāryadīkṣā*, and so on. But then, there is a chance of somebody who has no guru, and who gets an intuitive um initiation, and he's called *pratibha guru*, the guru by illumination, or guru by inspiration, *pratibhā*, *prati*… *pratibhā guru*. So, he has not undergone any ritual, he has not uh even had any predecessor, but he receives that sudden enlightenment uh by inspiration, *pratibhā*. So that *pratibhā* and that inspiration… it is always possible. That is…
