# Namaḥ Śivāya

namashivāya. Śāśvataṃ pañcakṛtyavidhāyinēcitanandaghaṇasvātmāparāmārthabhāsine namaḥ. Śivāya. Śāśvataṃ pañcakṛtyavidhāyinēcitanandaghaṇasvātmāparāmārthabhāsine. Hearing and seeing Swami Lakshman yesterday, I felt that I should keep silent now, but uh, it is also my duty to complete this. But now you have a whole different perspective on this tradition and its experience. Actually, the sūtra 16, *Mātyāvikāsacitānandalābha*, 16 or 17? 17. *Mātyāvikāsacitānandalābha*. The expansion of the center—this is the starting point and the ending point for different kinds of practices and experiences which are at different levels of the *upāya*s. And in the commentary on Sūtra 17 itself, he keeps it to the essential, and by defining the center as *saṃvidbhagawatī*, he gives the greatest importance to consciousness, to awareness, without any other technique, *yukti*, after what you see so many *yukti*s. Because this corresponds most to *pratyavijñā*. And that is the basis also of the other practices, but other practices are necessary uh in order to rise to that level of consciousness, depending on our own uh condition. 

So, in Sūtra 18, he has given this four groups of groups of practices. They are not even singular practices, but groups of practices which lead to the same goal—that means, the expansion of the center. Where center is primarily uh meant uh the *Madhyanādī*, the central vein, the central channel. *Suṣumnā* is rarely used, but occasionally it is used, but it means of course the same. Now we have come to this fantastic position with the pillar of gold established in the center. There are different ways of *śaktisaṃkocavikāsa*. We are still in that: different ways of uh concentrating. Here, *saṃkoca* is nothing negative, but it's more the condensing or concentrating and expanding the energy. 

We are on page 98, and I did not take the last quote from *Kālataḥ*, which is again a very brief sentence but very important at the end of 98: *rūpādiṣo parīṇāmāt tatsiddhiḥ*. The attainment of that occurs by transformation, which happens even when the forms are present. *Ubhayaśo* is very brief. Even when the means, even when the external realities are there, but by transformation, *parīṇāmaso*. Of course, *parīṇāma* is spiritual transformation. And *tatsiddhi* means the accomplishment of that, means of course that um *mātyāvikāsa*, expansion of the center. 

And now he comes to other examples for *śaktisaṃkocavikāsa*. Obviously, they’re taken from the *Vijñānabhairava*. So we have already had some examples of the *Vijñānabhairava*, and here Kṣemarāja himself gives a number of examples. 

Page 99: *Iti śakticeṣā saṃkocavikāsau nāsāputaspandanakramamṛśatsukṣmaprāṇaśaktyā prūbhedanā krama-kramāsādita ūrdhvakundalinīpade prasaraviśrāntidarśanāpariśīlanam.* Now, this is a very concrete practice with *prāṇa*, and which leads to the rising of *kuṇḍalinī*. The *ūrdhva kuṇḍalinī*, the upper uprising *kuṇḍalinī*. Yes. As far as *saṃkocavikāsa* of energy is concerned, first he gives that example of... he does not go into the details. But he actually presupposes that people already, like you know, already something about *kuṇḍalinī*, about *cakra*s and *nādī*s, etcetera. Because the text is not primarily a practical text, but it gives you the framework for all these practices and the context in which you can understand them. So, there's not very much is said about *kuṇḍalinī*, but obviously it is assumed that uh the reader or the practitioner already knows. And here the concrete practices with *prāṇa* gradually brought about by the... It is another kind of matter that is quite clear in this center. But then you have to fully understand what is this *vahnī* and *viṣa*. So, as I say, I'm not expanding on something which I have not experienced myself. Well, Swamiji gives another level of interpretation of *jñāna icchā jñāna*. Or you mean this one? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. What is *medhā*? *Medhākaṇḍa* is that ah, lowest *cakra*. This is the lowest *cakra*. 

Now, in our sūtra, the next practice is *vāhaccheda*. Means the interruption or the... of the flow of *prāṇa*. *Vama vāha vāhayo vāmadakṣiṇagatayo prāṇāpānayo cheda hṛdaya viśrānti purassaram antaḥ kakārahakārādi prāyaṇāt anaska anaṣkavārṇoccāraṇena vicchedanam.* Now, these flows are the flows of *prāṇa* and *apāna*, that is exhalation and inhalation, in the two ah, in the left and right channels, *nādī*s. And their interruption or their gap… or the pause, yeah, he says, pause. …which are ah *hṛdaya viśrānti purassara*, which are which lead to resting in the heart. And the process is through a very difficult operation which has to do with *mantra*. When, from the *mantra*, you remove the vowel and only the consonant remains, huh huh huh, which is actually unpronounceable. So, this is again something which I have not practiced. And on the occasion of this, actually trying to pronounce something which is unpronounceable without vowel, *anaṣka*. There is that, that gap uh is established between the two breaths, *prāṇa* and *apāna*. Because it's again the question how to enter into the middle channel. So, this is another method. Which is described in the *Tantra* *jñāna* *garbha*. *Anaṣka kā kṛtakṛtāyāte prasṛta pārśvanāḍīdvayā chido'visṛta chetaso hṛdayapankajacastyodare, udeti tava tārita andha tamasā sa vidyāṅku vidyāṅkuro ya īśa parameśatāṃ janayetum paśur apyalam.* In the heart lotus, *hṛdayapankaja udare*, of one whose mind has been controlled, *visṛta chetasah*, whose two *nādī*s extending on both sides have been stilled by the restraint brought about by the sounding vowelless *ka* and whose blinding darkness has been dispelled, *vitṛta*—now, *vitṛta chetasah*, the two lateral *pārśvanāḍī*—arises that sprout of knowledge, *udeti tava*, 'Your' means always the Devī, the *śakti*, or World Mother, which is adequate to produce divinity even in the limited soul. *Parameśa parameśatāṃ paśur apyalam.* So, it is a very high method, because if it leads to that state of divinity. But it requires, as he said once before, it requires a guru to teach you how to practice this. Just from the text uh it will not be easy to do it. So, actually, *vāhaccheda* can also happen in other ways, but he gives this example of this ah vowelless *mantra* sound. 

Now, the next one, number four in the sūtra, is *ādyāntakotyām*. And this is um also in different contexts. There are practices of fixing one's concentration on the beginning and end of any perception. He gives a particular practice, but this can be applied to… in the Vi-, *jñāna bhairava*, we find many such examples, at the beginning and at the end. Point. The the point of the beginning and of the end. And here, *ādikoṭi hṛdayam antakoṭi dvādaśāntā*. The starting point is the heart, and the ending point is *dvādaśāntā*. Now, *dvādaśāntā* means actually the end of the twelfth or the the the twelve-finger space. Means three fists above the head. So, this is the *bahirdvādaśāntā*, the external uh *dvādaśāntā* above the *brahmarandhra*. But the term *dvādaśāntā* has been applied to different *cakra*s, so that is quite confusing. It is also sometimes applied to *brahmarandhra* itself. But I have found something in the *Netra Tantra* uh where it is very clear that the *uccāra* of Oṃ goes through twelve stages. And this *dvādaśāntā* would be the end of the twelfth, and that is actually *brahmarandhra*. So, it goes through all the uh *cakra*s and stages and till here. So why not? This is the end of the twelfth. End of the twelfth uh stages. So there are different interpretations, but I'm quite convinced that this is correct. Then it has been expanded to uh other locations in the subtle body. But mostly the difference is made between external *dvādaśāntā*, then means it the natural breath, where it ends at the end of the nose, twelve-finger breath, where the the you cannot feel the breath anymore. It's external *dvādaśāntā*. And internal *dvādaśāntā*, or upper *dvādaśāntā*, is above the *brahmarandhra*. So anyhow, he doesn't define it here. But in all this yoga texts and in *vijnana bhairava*, this term occurs. And he will give a quotation. *Tayo prāṇollāsa viśrāntiavasare nibhālanam, chittaniveśanapariśīlanam.* Now, we have all this *pariśīlana* etcetera, different ways of practicing, fixing one's mind, etcetera. Here it, it defines actually. *Nibhālanam* means *chittaniveśanapariśīlanam*. Practicing by by making the, mind… by fixing the mind at the time of *viśrānti avasare*, at the time of attaining that point of rest. It means, it is always a practice of attention, of awareness. *Chittaniveśanapariśīlanam*: practicing by by making the mind enter or by fixing the mind. 

And then he gives the same example which we have already heard from the *vijnana bhairava*, but it is uh always useful to meditate on this. It is one of the most powerful meditations of the *vijnana bhairava* on the heart. I'm just 39. *Hṛdayagāśe nili nilīnakṣa pamasasamputa madhyagā ananyachetasapage paraṃ saubhāgyamāpnoti yat*. If one merges one's senses in the space of the heart, that is, at the center between the two halves of the heart lotus, with an undistracted mind, then, O blessed one, one attains supreme blessedness. It's a very beautiful meditation. Which uh again *mātṛ*. And here he gives it as an example of of *ādyāntakotyām*. And it is, of course, an an example of *bhāvanā*. I don't know if this… my article on *bhāvanā*, has it been copied? Because there I give the meaning of *bhāvanā* in different contexts of the *vijnana bhairava*. Which *bhāvanā* means you start with some imagination, you start with some visualization, and then you internalize it. And you leave that uh imagination and uh come to the experience. And the condition is always *ananyachetasā*, means with undistracted mind. 

And he gives uh the other example from *vijnana bhairava*, which is not a particular one, but when *vijnana bhairava* universalizes a particular practice or experience, then it always starts, *yatra tatra tatra yatratatra yatratatra yatratatra dvādaśānti manaḥ kṣipet pratikṣaṇam kṣīṇavṛttir vi-, vailakṣaṇyaṃ tadanayā bhavet*. It is verse 51. If one fixes one's mind on *dvādaśāntā*—now, you just imagine which *dvādaśāntā* is meant, [it] doesn't say—every moment, in any way, and wherever one is. It's universalizing. Not any particular sitting in the meditation hall, but in any situation. Then the fluctuations of the mind will dissolve, and within days, one will experience an extraordinary state. It's a very beautiful… how the *vijnana bhairava* often describes the result of these practices in a very uh neutral way or in a very universal way. *Vailakṣaṇyam*, an extraordinary state. [It] Doesn't say exactly how it is, what it is, but something extraordinary you will experience. But this… in every, any situation, any occasion, any time, fixing the mind there. So, this is universalizing a particular experience which you have already practiced, and then you apply it to any situation. And this is the whole process of *vijnana bhairava* is like this. You start from a particular experience, and then you apply it to ordinary life situations, any experience, ordinary experience, etc. 

But all this… this undistracted mind, etc., is the condition then this uh *ādi* *ādi anta koti*, he gives another interpretation that it refers to *ādipadāt unmeṣa*, means by the word *ādi*, by the word etc., *unmeṣa tasmāt* uh *niśīvanam*. He means the the practice of *unmeṣa*. Now, *unmeṣa* means the unfolding, the the blossoming, the uh something which is not uh concentration but expansion. He doesn't use the word *vikāsa*, but it's obviously… *unmeṣa* [is a] particular form of *vikāsa*, that blossoming. Of course, [it] doesn't say anything that… quotation um from *Spanda Kārikā*: *unmeṣa śayito vijñeyaḥ svayam tam upalakṣayet*. That is called as *unmeṣa*; one should experience it by oneself. But, of course, something is explained before in the *Spanda Kārikā*, and then the examples given for this *unmeṣa* are joyful experiences in the *Vijñāna Bhairava*. So, where the mind is not uh concentrated, not fixed, but it is expanded. But, of course, it presupposes already that you have already trained your mind in that uh uh concentration, etc. And then everything else becomes a joyful expansion. 

So, he gives these three verses which refer to joyful uh experiences: 72, 73, and 74. So, the first example is music. *Gītādi viṣaya āsvāda samasaukhyaika eka ekakadhātmanā yoginas tan tanmayatvena manorūḍheḥ tadātmatā tadātmatā.* When the mind of the *yogin* is one with the unparalleled joy of music and other aesthetic delights, then he is identified with it due to the expansion of his mind which has merged in it, *tanmayatvena*. So, unless there is a merging, that enjoying music will not lead to that state. If there is the the duality between the listener and the the object of listening, if that duality remains, then nothing happens. It has to be a merging and becoming one with it, *tanmayatvena*. Yeah. 73 and… no, sorry. It was 72 as the first quotation. Nothing, sorry. That is eating and drinking. So, that's the easiest. Well, it looks easy, but the most common experiences… to transform *them* into a divine experience is more difficult. Going to a temple or to a monastery and so on, then your mind is already focused on something. But if you’re [having an] ordinary experience, then your mind has to be already uh prepared for that experience. No, sorry, that came first. When one is filled with joy arising from the pleasure of eating and drinking, one should meditate on the state of fullness. Then the great bliss will arise, *paritābhyāsāt*. So here it's not just enjoying food, but meditating on *pāvayet*. So, this is *pāvanā* on the state of fullness, *paritābhyāsāt*. So, because eating gives you an a physical experience of fullness, but then you have to meditate on the… what is that state, not the physical fullness, but that state of fullness which is symbolized by that eating and drinking. So that *bhāvāyet paritābhyāstā*. So then music is the next one, and 74 is again this kind of universalizing that experience. *Yatra yatra manaṣ tuṣṭir manaṣ tatraiva ādhārayet tatra tatra parānanda svarūpam sampravartate.* Wherever the mind finds satisfaction, let it be fixed there, for there itself the nature of Supreme Bliss will become manifest. So again, it's not just enjoying anything but holding the mind, *ādhārayet*. That's why these practices are called *ādhāranā*. It's just not experiencing anything and uh which is an ordinary experience, but holding it. Then it becomes a *ādhāranā*. The satisfaction. And this is, of course, the Tantric way. And and the Devī at the end of the *Vijñāna Bhairava* and, I think, also of the *Parātriṁśikā Tantra*… see that it is uh… she describes that now she has attained that full satisfaction—*tripti*, *tripti*, *tuṣṭi*, and *tripti*. There they are… words coming from food. You are satisfied, you are something fulfilled. So, *tripti*. What is *tripti*? *Tripti* is also a satisfaction uh… you had good food and you're you're you're satisfied. So, *tripti*. It's physical satisfaction, or or… No, exactly that, see that Tantric… they take these examples and the words also from the physical satisfaction, but then transporting it to the spiritual level. That is… so, these three examples of… for joyful experiences, they also stand for this *ādi anta koti* because [of] the beginning and the end because even in the case of a joyful experience, it's not the eating process itself, but it is the satisfaction which which comes at the end, the state of satisfaction. 

*Evam anyatāpi ānandapūrṇa svā svātmabhāvanā ādikam anumantvayam*. So, there are other uh also other meditations which… *anyatāpi ānandapūrṇa svātmabhāvanā* um meditations on one's own self filled with bliss, so that they can be inferred. So, these are just examples, but that's why the whole of aesthetic experience comes here in the context of spirituality. Because from that aesthetic experience, that state of fullness, [that] state of satisfaction arises. 

*Iti evam ādaya atra madhye vikāse upāyaḥ*. Now, these are the means for the expansion of the center, and also others. So, these are only examples. There are so many other means for the expansion of the center. But now comes another very important sūtra and its commentary. This is absolutely important. Now you have practiced something, you've experienced something, some particular um way of entering into the center. But how to stabilize it? See, the important question for the *yogin* is… not everybody has experiences. Everybody has also very high experiences. And sometimes people don't recognize their high, and they don't cultivate them. That's why the word *anuśīlanam* is very good to translate by 'cultivating.' You have to cultivate what you have already experienced, what you already have. But if you don't cultivate it, you lose it. So that is why the important task in the spiritual path is to stabilize, stabilize that experience. Make it some permanent state. And this is… the next sūtra is concerned with that. *Madhyavikāsāt citānandalābhaḥ sa eva ca paramayoginā samāveśa samapatyādi paryāya samādhiḥ tasya nitautitattvena yuktim āha.* Now, here he says by expansion of the center, one attains the uh place of consciousness, and that is the state of *samāveśa*, of the absorption, of the supreme *yogin*, of the highest *yogin*, *paramayogin*. And this *samāveśa*… here he just um names the synonyms for *samāveśa*: *samapatti* and *samādhi*. Because then yoga takes this uh… these are commonly used, *samapatti* also and *samādhi* also. So, he doesn't distinguish here between *samāveśa*, *samapatti*, *samādhi*. So, okay. This is the experience of the great *yogin*. But now he tells… it's very funny because Kṣemarāja himself is the author of the sūtra and the author of the commentary. But he speaks in the third person. Now, he will tell—means he himself will tell—what is the means and what is the practice for *nitautitattvena*, for making it permanent. For making it… but 'permanent' is here always expressed by this uh dynamic expression *nitautitā*, 'ever arising.' And the image comes actually… and there's a beautiful um passage in the Upaniṣads: “For the enlightened one, the sun neither rises nor sets. It stands. It stands firm in the zenith.” So, I derived this *nitautitā* from that idea that the enlightened one… his sun does not set anymore. Uh, I can give you that if you're interested in the Upaniṣads. So, *nitautitā*. *Samādhi* is not… you are not sitting for one hour in meditation and you're going very deep, and then you come out and again uh entangled in so many uh worldly activities and so on. But *nitautitatvena*. *Nitautitatve*. So, what is the method for making this *samādhi* or *samāveśa* ever arising? Let it ever stay in that state. And this is very… that's also uh spiritual psychology, we could say. 

*Samādhi saṁskārabhūtayā nityam pūya pūyaścittaikyā āmarṣāṭ nitautitasamādhilābhaḥ*. And this tick… *Yutanī*… in the state of external awareness, external activity. I've already said that the term comes from yoga where you get out of *samadhi* in external consciousness. Even in the state of external consciousness, which is *samādhi saṁskāra vārtī*, which is full with the traces of *samādhi*, or full with the impressions of *samādhi*. So that's *samādhi*, that meditation. You don't need to take it at the very highest level; even just meditation, contemplation. The traces of the impressions… these are the aftereffects of *samādhi*. *Bhūyaḥ bhūyaḥ*, again and again. So, *bhūyaḥ bhūyaḥ*. You remember what Swamiji said yesterday? You have to do it again and again. It's not… don't be satisfied, whatever practice you do. Do it again and again. Otherwise uh it gets diminished, and ultimately lost. *Bhūyaḥ bhūyaḥ*, again and again. But what is to be done? *Cit aikya āmarśāt*. *Āmarśa* is all the… kind of awareness or reflection or meditation, etcetera, on the unity of consciousness. Meditate, contemplating again and again on the… your unity with pure consciousness. *Cit aikya āmarśāt*. So, this is the practice: to remember, to contemplate, to put one's awareness again and again on that unity with pure consciousness. And by that, there is the attainment, *lābha*, of the ever-risen, ever-present state of *samādhi*. And this is a beautiful process where this tradition has a very clear practice and method. So, it presupposes that the *yogī* has already attained *samāveśa* or *samādhi*, or experienced. *Āsādita samāveśo yogī yogīvaru yutanā api samādhi samādhir samādhi rasa saṁskāreṇa*. Here, *rasa* is very important. *Samādhi rasa saṁskāreṇa*. That is *śiva iva śānandam cūrṇamāno*. Now here comes really that ecstatic experience of the *yogī*. See, *samādhi* is not something… oh, people say, “Oh, you have to just sit very still,” and there's no… but there is a *rasa*, there is a joyful… something joyful in it, unless we experience that that *rasa*. So, *rasa* is a term which comes in the aesthetic experience, physical and… and with the divine. *Ānanda rasa*, that's food. There's of course… we just had [the section on] food, drinking, and… *Samādhi rasa saṁskāra*. So, what that trace which remains or that um impression which remains is that joyfulness of the *samādhi*. Otherwise, why should you be attracted to experience it again and again unless there's this joyful *rasa*? So, you experience something extremely blissful. *Samādhi rasa saṁskāreṇa*. This is some… *Śiva iva śānandam*. He becomes… and it said, “the *yogī*...” Well, we are all *yogī*s. Whoever does spiritual practice is a *yogī*. He becomes so blissful that his… he starts moving in ecstasy. *Cūrṇa cūrṇamāna*. 

Now, in the *Tantrāloka* and *Tantrasāra* of Abhinavagupta, he describes something which is called the 'five signs of the *yogī*,' *Yogī cinha* or *patalakṣaṇāni*. These are the symptoms of the path, that when these symptoms arise one by one, then you know there's some progress. These are not the highest. But it belongs to *āṇavopāya*, but it's very, very important. And and just because it ends in *cūrṇī*. The last stage is *cūrṇī*. It starts from *ānanda*. So, there is some blissful… blissful experience. And that leads to [a] kind of feeling of elevation, *udbhava*, something which is elevating. *Ānanda udbhava*. And then comes [a] the kind of shaking or *kampā*. Something trembling, you know? Sometimes the body even starts shaking. Because… and he explains… Abhinavagupta explains why, because that shaking comes from the uh… that the body… your identification with the body gets shaken. See, because we are so much fixed in our body identification. And the moment there is something which uh shakes that… so even the body becomes… starts shaking. But it is a phase; it's only a phase. *Ānanda udbhava kampā*. And after the shaking, there comes a state of complete calm, *nidrā*. *Nidrā* does not mean sleep and also not *yoga nidrā* in the technical sense, but complete calm. And the danger of some *yogī*s is that they think, “Ah, now [I] have reached.” So… and if they stop at this stage, then it is finished, because that *nidrā* is not the highest stage. It is a calm, it is a quiet, but it's definitely not the highest. And after *nidrā* comes *cūrṇī*. And that's, I think, something very much close to our Sufi friends uh and to the dervishes. That *cūrṇī* actually means, you know, reeling under the intoxicating effect of that blissful uh experience, ecstatic… some ecstatic state. So because he uses here that expression… this *samādhi rasa*, and the *yogī* is so blissful that he he starts dancing, or you have all these uh you know, like the Bauls, and you have all this uh different kinds of *yogī*s who express it also physically. But that… uh *ānanda udbhava kampā nidrā cūrṇī*. *Cūrṇī* means literally 'turning,' but some ecstatic… it doesn't mean to be a physical movement. It can be, but it can be just an ecstatic state… state of ecstasy… trance. A trance which is not *nidrā*, which is not static. So, he he reels under the effect of that bliss. 

*Bāva rasena śarada*… this is so badly printed… *labham iva cit gagana iva liyamānam paśyan*. *Bhūyo bhūyo anta mukha mukatām iva samavalambana māno*, etc. Let us first start from this. And he experiences… also the whole multitude of external objects is still present, but it is only like bits of clouds on the sky… of autumn sky, which don't produce rain. This [is] often an example given for something which does not have any effect. But uh… this… bits of clouds in autumn after the rainy season is over, which are just uh… they will disappear, and the sky will be clear again. So, this existence of the external objects is like those bits of clouds in the autumn sky which will clear up. So again, a hint that our meditation… when we have these *vikalpa* are coming again and again, don't think that they are very solid. They are just floating like these bits of clouds in the sky. And and they get dissolved again. *Liyamānam*. These clouds get dissolved again in the pure sky. *Bhūyo bhūyo antarmukhatām iva*. And by again and again reverting to that introverted state, *Antamukhatā*, *samavalambana māno*. *Nimīlana samādhi krameṇa cit aikyam eva vimeṣan yutanā abhimata avasare api samādhi ekarasa eva bhavatī*. *Ekarasa*. We have these two kinds of *samādhi*: *nimīlana* and *unmīlana samādhi*. *Nimīlana samādhi* means with closed eyes. *Unmīlana samādhi*, with open eyes. When we were sitting in nature yesterday, some were meditating with open eyes and some with closed eyes. So, *nimīlana* or *unmīlana*. And meditating in… in the process of uh *samādhi* with closed eyes… *Nimīlana samādhi krameṇa vimeṣan*, meditating, contemplating, or reflecting on the unity of consciousness, *cit aikyam*. *Yutanā abhimata avasare api*, even at [the] occasion of external awareness, his *samādhi* becomes *ekarasa*, becomes of one essence, unified essence. *Samādhi ekarasa eva bhavatī*. Meditating on his identity with *cit* by the process of *nimīlana samādhi*. Now comes this beautiful… and this belongs to the Krama tradition. We have already spoken about the tradition of Krama. And the essential… and highest… means highest method in the Krama tradition is called Krama Mudrā. There's no space… Krama Mudrā. This is what is described in this Krama Mudrās. 

Page 104. *Krama mudrāyā anta svarūpayā vahyamukha samādhiṣṭo bhavatī sādhakaḥ. Tatra ādau vāhyāt anta praveśaḥ abhyantarāt vāhya svarūpe praveśaḥ āveśa vaśāt jāyate. Iti savāhya abhyantara abhyantaro ayam mudrā krama.* What happens by means of Krama Mudrā? So, it's a technical term. The *sādhakaḥ*, the practitioner, gets absorbed, *samādhiṣṭa*, by *inna anta*… by his inner nature, and he becomes turned… he is turned outside to the external, *bahya mukha*, from the inner… innermost nature. He turns outward, and then *tata adau vahiat antara pravesha*. And then, from the external consciousness, he enters [into] the inner consciousness, *antar pravesha*. And from the *abhiantara*, from the inner consciousness, again, he enters… he enters the external, *bahya svarupe*, in his external consciousness, and by *aveshavasha*, by the power of… power of absorption. So, this is not an ordinary… just closing, opening your eyes, but you have to be in that state of *avesha*; otherwise, it is not *krama mudra*. Otherwise, you're just opening and closing your eyes, but if you are in that state of *avesha*, of deep absorption, and then this moving from within [to] outside and from outside within, it is a process which cannot even be made; it has to happen spontaneously. And this… an expansion of that inner fullness, of that inner power, which moves outside and again is taken within, again is taken without. And that is why it is called *krama*. *Krama* means 'a sequence' or 'a process.' So that process, moving from inside to outside, from outside to inside, that is called *krama mudra* or *mudra krama*. So, it's the same uh… the process of *sabahiantara*. This is the *mudra krama* and *avesha*, the meaning… the *avesha* meaning… it was the meaning uh *avesha*… hmm. Yeah. *Koī aur alag arth hai āveś kā*? *Āveśa* is absorption. Some *āveśa*. It's the same: absorption. I mean uh *samādhi*, but before we said that this… are synonyms uh *samaveśa* uh *sama badhyan* *samādhi*. Uh, so, *āveśa* is also a synonym. So, unless that absorption is there, this *krama mudra* cannot happen. And in general, the term *mudrā* is only used in *tantra*. Of course, it's also used for ritual uh gestures, hand gestures, but in the spiritual uh practice, it is only used for [a] complete mystical attitude, so which in… involves the the mind, the body, and everything. It can find expression in the body, but it's not necessarily. It can be just complete stillness. That's also *mudrā*. But *mudrā* means an attitude which completely… manifest… in the body the… that state of uh absorption. So, it's more a mystical attitude than [it] is some gesture which you uh make ritually or even in yoga. So, it's to help us to overcome the concept of this brain, so I am so hard of hearing. Or if somebody could… so, is this method trying to help us uh to remove the concept of space? Concept of space? Yes, and a space. That this… remove the concept of this brain, because it's the concept of space. So actually, we have internal and external… yeah, in that sense, yes. Yes. It presupposes… yeah. Yes. But we live in space. So the poi- point is that this whole spirituality is an integration. So you're not only establi- uh inside and then you forget about the world, that we have been saying this again and again. But an integration of the external into the internal, internal to the external. And that's why it is an integration of the whole of uh reality. We have that… this beautiful expression, *viśvamātma sat karoti*. He he makes the universe his own. He he integrates the universe in his ownconsciousness. That means an expansion of the consciousness, of course. Actually, so, it’s our heart… open… like openness to the world. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Thank you.

*Atrayam at* the… This is the meaning. *Sr̥ṣṭi sthiti saṃhṛti saṃvit chakratmakam kramam mudrayate*. Now, uh uh *mudrā* comes from… I mean, the the verb derived from *mudrā*, *mudrayati*, means 'to seal.' *Mudrā* also means 'a seal,' 'a stamp.' So, to… putting a seal, you know? *Mudrā* means something like… you have the coin… a… the old types of coin? They are *mudrā*s, because they are stamped, and this is something which remains permanently. So that impression remains; it is stamped, and uh… so, that impression remains on the soul. This practice… it seals the sequence of… consisting of creation, maintenance, um, reabsorption, and that whole cycle of consciousness… *saṃvit chakra*. That whole cycle of consciousness. And that's why he has been insisting on these five acts. [It] Is not as the cosmic acts, which are also there in the beginning, but as a cycle of consciousness. That's why you're right. It is the external and the internal *saṃvit chakra*, which is, of course, *śakti chakra*, the cycle of energy… cycle of energies. *Saṃvit chakram atmakam kramam*. It seals that process of the cycle of consciousness, consisting of creation, maintenance, dissolution, etcetera. 

*Svātiṣṭhitamat ātmasat karoti*, and establishing it in oneself, it makes it one's own. But *ya ya antaḥ turiya chitishakti*. It makes one's own that that power of consciousness which is the fourth, the *turīya* state. *Ya ya antaḥ turiya chitishakti ātmasat karoti*. It is an integration of that power of consciousness in one's own self. 

*Tayagramama mudraya*. And by this *krama mudra antar*. *Iti purnahanta sarupaya bahyamukam*. This internal being, which is of the nature of full i- fullness of I-consciousness… *Pūrṇatā purnahantasarupa*, which is of the essence of fullness of I-consciousness… it is also external. Means, it also provides the external objects, which are also *ya britha api samaviṣṭa*, completely absorbed. *Sakṣākṛitaparśaktis*—*para*… completely absorbed means the the expansion of energies has been experienced… wanting another word… she was wanting another word to *samaveś*– *sama*– *samaviṣṭa*. *Sakṣākṛitaparśaktis* *para*. That expansion of the supreme energy, which is directly experienced. *Sakṣākṛitaḥ*. Directly experienced. That *sādhaka* or that *yogī*… that supreme *yogī*, *paramayogī*… he be- becomes fully absorbed, means he experiences that expansion of energy. 

*Tat sraddhā vahiat grasyamanat viṣayagramā*– *viṣaya gramat antaḥ*… oh my God. This is… we'll try to finish um this commentary. But o- otherwise, we can leave it for the afternoon, I think, because it is very, very important. So wha- what follows now is also very important to understand that integration of the internal with the external, which is again not just a question of the *yogī* having the satisfaction of his own experience, but it's a question of integration of the whole of reality. That's why this *viśvamātmasat karoti* is so uh important an expression. Sha- *śaktis* *para*. Sha- *śaktis* *para*. Yeah, it is an… an explosion… explosion of energy, you can say. But this is… the *sādhaka*, the *yogī* of the highest type, becomes *samaviṣṭa*: the one who has realized the unfolding of the highest *śakti*, even while he is extraverted, etcetera. I think we… we complete the commentary in the afternoon, and the- then uh we come to the last sūtra, which is also quite long, but we'll try. In any case, we will finish tomorrow.
