>namaḥ śivāya śatatam pañcakṛtva vidhānena śivānandaghanasvātmā paramaparāvabhāsī namaḥ śivāya śatatam pañcakṛtva vidhānena śivānandaghanasvātmā paramaparāvabhāsī 

>Please take your sheet with the ślokas. So first, just to know what is _prati abhijñā_. _Prati_ means towards, but it is a movement which reflects. Like you look in a mirror and that image reflects back to you. This is _prati_. Or somebody comes to meet you, _prati_. The next prefix is _abhi_. _Abhi_ means aiming intensely towards something. Aiming, ah, intensely. And _jñā_ is the root for knowing or knowledge, cognition. So it is aiming at this cognition, this knowledge which reflects back to you. That's why it's recognition. Re- means also it comes back to you: reflection, recognition. _Pratyabhijñā_ denotes both the experience and the philosophy. And means the philosophy means the whole tradition of uh that spiritual traditional and philosophical uh reflection. And this connoting both of course is meaningful, because the philosophy--as most Indian philosophies and Buddhism of course were primarily--have been elaborated on the basis of an experience of this great enlightened uh beings. And uh the the Buddha, the _siddhas_, the _yogīs_, the _ṛṣis_, and and so on. And Utpaladeva, who has elaborated the philosophy of _pratyabhijñā_ um most comprehensively in his _Īśvara pratyabhijñā kārikā vṛtti_, etc., he makes this very clear. Because in the very first uh a kind of _maṅgala śloka_ to his work _Īśvara pratyabhijñā_ he relates it to his experience in a very personal way. See normally a _maṅgala śloka_, what we have just recited and I'll explain it later, a _maṅgala śloka_ is addressed to the deity. It's a _praṇām_ to the _guru_ or to the deity or whatever. But in his first uh verse he doesn't do that. He says what happened to him. He had an experience, and that experience--he is transmitting it and explaining it in terms of a whole philosophy. And um this that. And he starts very unusually--that's very typical of Utpaladeva--"kathaṃcit tadāsādya maheśvara sadāsyam." Somehow it happened to me that the grace of the Lord has come to me and has made me his servant. _Maheśvara sadāsyam_: the servant of the Great Lord. _Kathaṃcit_. Somehow, I can't say how. Something happened, and it transformed me. And uh this is the translation: "After having in some way (_kathaṃcit_) attained the status of servant of the Supreme Lord, and wishing to offer assistance also to the whole of mankind, I shall make possible the awakening of the recognition of the Lord, which brings about the achievement of all success, of all perfection." So here you have immediately the three steps: his own experience, the grace of the uh Great Lord, and his desire to share this um treasure which he has gained with the whole of mankind, to make it possible for them to awaken to their own self-recognition. So this element of uh _bodhicitta_ is there, that you don't strive to have this experience just for your own private salvation. You get your _mukti_ and forget about the rest of the world. But um you have this experience in order to share it with the whole of mankind. And this is the motivation behind also writing uh these texts. And Abhinavagupta says it also in his introductory uh verses: I am uh it is a tedious job to write such a composite text, but they do it for the sake of the disciples, for the sake of mankind, for making it possible for them to attain self-realization.

>Now um this experience is one of sudden enlightenment. And uh this is the--as we have just--in Buddhism and in Hinduism also two ways. Uh, one is the gradual one: going through so many stages and uh rituals and practices and uh _yoga_ and this and that. And the other is the sudden enlightenment. And um our authors and commentators on the _Śaivāgamas_--which I have written yesterday from Somananda to our author Kṣemarāja--they were all in favor of sudden enlightenment. But of course not everybody is qualified for that. So if you are not capable, I mean it depends on the quality of the disciple. If the disciple is very pure, very mature, then--as I said yesterday--kind of initiation can happen just by look or by touch or even without any cause. There is no relation between cause and effect. It happens without any explanation. That's why he says _kathaṃcit_: How can I explain how it happened? It just happened. And those of you who have done the _Vijñānabhairava_ uh they know that so many examples are given of this sudden enlightenment, where it happens in different circumstances of life. Not only when you are sitting in meditation, but in any circumstance. So we will come of course to all that in the course of the text. But it is very necessary to understand that _pratyabhijñā_ is at the highest level of all these spiritualities because it aims at sudden enlightenment. Now can--how can you say it aims? _Pratyabhijñā_, you cannot aim at something which happens spontaneously. But yet whatever we do: meditation, _yoga, prāṇāyāma_, this, that, it is all a preparation of body, mind, and so on uh to to prepare the ground for this to happen. But of course it can happen also without. So there is no binding, as we will have it in the very first _sūtra_: "_citi svātantrā_," that consciousness is absolutely free. It can uh act without our even being worthy. And of course for the others there is also a process of gradual purification, gradual uh preparation. And what is very important in this tradition: intensification. See, the greatest enemy of spirituality is laxitude or laziness. I mean just letting yourself go. But what is demanded is intensification of experience, of any experience, also of sense experiences. So intensity is important um in any aspect of life, and then it can lead you--that intensity can lead you--to that sudden flash of awakening. That is one of the greatest scholar of Kashmir Śaivism, Professor Sanderson, he he calls it: prescription of intensity, which is of course related to the _tantric_ uh practices. 

>Now uh I don't want to waste much time on this um context, but uh since many of you may be not knowing uh this tradition I still have to mention it. The so-called Kashmir Śaivism, of which we spoke yesterday--what is the meaning of Kashmir, what is the meaning of Śaivism--consisted or became was a kind of um synthesis of several _tantric_ traditions. And these um _tantric_ traditions are related um they were later brought into a great synthesis by Abhinavagupta in the 10th-11th centuries. And they are: the Kula, Kaula, where extreme _tantric_ traditions which are also famous for their um sexual rituals uh etc. The Krama, which has also other names, Mahārtha, etc., um is a tradition which was equally alive in South India with a center in Chidambaram. And this is a uh tradition which worships the 12 _kālīs_. But the 12 _kālīs_ are not goddesses depicted in any image, but they are our own uh sensory deities. The deities of our senses are called _kālīs_. They are different aspects of uh _kālī_: the divine--divinized senses. And the Krama tradition works with this uh process of um sense experience in a divinized uh uh way. And Krama has uh deeply influenced also Abhinavagupta. And then the third: Trika. The threefold or triadic uh tradition, which has been earlier in a specific _tantric_ tradition. But then Abhinavagupta has enlarged it and made it uh so universal as to encompass all the other _tantric_ traditions. So that is the different stages of Trika. And uh this last phase of Trika in Abhinavagupta's synthesis--and we always know that Kṣemarāja is his disciple, so he has inherited all this uh synthesis--is a triadic structure of not only the Absolute but of the whole of reality. 

>That's why I have written Spanda at the side, because Spanda was not a _tantric_ tradition. But it was something uh started by our our Kashmiri authors um Vasugupta and Kallata, etc. So Spanda means the doctrine of vibration, which has again pervaded the entire--the entire philosophy and spirituality. This Trika can be symbolized by a triangle where you have here: Śiva, Śakti, Nara. That means the entire reality. So not only the divine, but including the human and the uh the whole of creation is contained in this triad um of Śiva, _śakti_ (his energy), and Nara. Nara means not only man or human being, but it means the entire created um universe. And these are of course uh the non-dualism. In a non-dualism they can be distinguished, but they cannot be separated. There is no Śiva without _śakti_, there is no _śakti_ without Śiva, and so on. But the whole uh this whole triad is pervaded and transcended by Anuttara. Anuttara means the Absolute: that which has nothing beyond--beyond it; that which has uh yeah, that which has nothing beyond it, which is the ultimate. And it is both at the center and encompassing the whole. Anu is not only at the center, but it is also encompassing the whole of reality. 

>So, and here of course there are other triads, many triads, the triad of energies of _shaktis_. And at this point would be: Parā, the supreme energy; the supreme--come--non-supreme, or the transcendent--come--immanent energy; and Aparā. Aparā is often translated as "lower," but not in any negative sense because uh everything is connected together. "Lower" means immanent, completely immanent. Immanent--immanent--transcendent and transcendent. And then there are the three _shaktis_ of Shiva, which are also our own energies that is--that is not space--_icchā, jñāna_, uh _icchā_, will; _jñāna_, knowledge; _kriyā_, acti-activity. So these are the three principal _shaktis_ of Shiva, which are also present in every conscious being. But we will come to all this. Um this just to give you an outline and uh of what is Trika.

>So what is the relation between Trika and _Pratyabhijña_? Precisely all this--this Kula, Kaula, Krama, Trika, etcetera--they were _Tantric_ traditions, and _Pratyabhijña_ is the philosophy which has overarched them and brought them into a quite universal uh system; and the system in which precisely uh spontaneous or sudden enlightenment is the highest point. And um many people ask why this uh philosophy has received so little attention in--even in Indian universities, departments of philosophy. Everybody speaks of six systems of philosophy, and so on. And besides those which are outside, Buddhism and Jainism, and so on. The reason is that um what I said yesterday about Kashmir. Kashmir has been uh quite cut off from the rest of the subcontinent, in spite of all these ascetics traveling and carrying the manuscripts and the knowledge. But um these texts remained unpublished and unknown till about 100 years ago. And then they were only published in Sanskrit. So very few people took um cognizance of them, and uh it is only in the last 50 years or so that uh these texts have become known, translated, studied, etcetera. But uh uh in the 14th century the South Indian Madhava, who wrote the _Sarvadarśanasaṃgraha_--means a summary, a a compendium of all the philosophical systems, not only six but 16--he uh he com- um included the _Pratyabhijñadarśana_ among these uh philosophical systems. So he was South Indian, and uh he so he he knew very well the value of this uh tradition, and um somehow it got one lost sight of in the later uh centuries. But it has been rediscovered um I must really say in the second half of the 20th century, and the great merit goes to my _Guru_ Swami Lakshman Joo, who has brought this tradition beyond Kashmir, because he was teaching the texts um both in Hindi and in English to scholars and students and disciples, and they translated and they transmitted this text. So he had a great role to play to make this tradition known outside Kashmir. And uh but the importance of _Pratyabhijña_ philosophy--I'm just quoting uh Professor Torella, who is a great specialist: "A presentation of _Pratyabhijña_ doctrines involves first and foremost giving voice to one of the most original and peculiar components of India's philosophical and religious scenario from medieval times down to our own: what is known as Tantrism." Because _Tantrism_ had a bad name, not only today but even earlier. So if these orthodox um followers of orthodox uh systems um they did not include this. One reason was also that this was a _Tantric_ philosophy. So _Tantras_ had a had a uh a bad name at that time also. But it is totally wrong to--what has been um assumed by many early scholars of _Tantrism_--that there's no philosophy in Tantra. Even the _Tantras_ themselves, they contain a section on philosophy. Not elaborated with all argumentation, but it is a section on _vidyā_, on uh knowledge and philosophy. And then he says: "In actual fact, _Pratyabhijña_, which provides the theoretical basis for all Hindu _Tantrism_, constitutes one of the highest and most original moments of all Indian thought." 

>So I think this is uh not a biased um but it is a uh true uh statement about the greatness of this um philosophy and this uh tradition. So here we are studying these days one of the highest points of this philosophical and spiritual tradition, where a _Pratyabhijña_--as he says--of all of Hindu _Tantrism_, not only Shaiva. It has been also accepted specifically by the Shaktas, the philosophy of Tripura, for example, and uh even by a section of non-dualistic Vaishnavas. So um it has not remained a sectarian philosophy. Now, all the whatever con- uh concerns the content, I leave it to the text itself instead of giving uh more explanations about the content. We will follow the text um as far as possible. Of course we will um finish it, even if in between we have to leave out something. But it's very important to come to the to the end because at the last part he gives um practices, practices which you maybe missing now. We are--we are now um dealing with the preparation for uh these practices. So uh we will now begin with explanation of this _Maṅgalaślokas_. Those of you who have--I mean everybody now has the text--but of course those who don't read Devanāgarī, in the _ślokas_ they are all transliterated, but um the other text is not--there's no transliteration. So I will write at least the _Sutras_ um in transliteration so that you can uh follow.

>Now, Kṣemarāja has composed uh this text uh by composing both the _Sutras_ and the commentary himself. Now I think everybody knows uh the importance of _Sutras_. _Sutras_ are extremely brief um uh aphoristic um statements which--sometimes only consisting of one uh or two words--um and um but which are containing uh a whole philosophy, a whole spirituality, a whole practice in just this brevity. And the ideal of the uh of the _Pandits_ was always to reduce the words, you know uh to make it more concise and still more concise. But the student of Indian philosophy had to start from the other end. He had to start with the commentary. First with a longer commentary, then with a shorter commentary, and then the culminating point is the _Sutra_. So you can start from the _Sutra_, go to the commentary, or start from the commentary and reach the _Sutra_. _Sutra_ means, of course, thread, and so it is also something uh uh like pearls on the thread. The whole text is strung together on this uh thread of the _Sutras_. And um most of the _Sutras_ are of course--you have in Buddhism you have in um every tradition has its own _Sutras_ as the starting point of their philosophy in great um brevity and density. And my idea is, but uh let us see how far we reach. Last year, we have tried this with the _Shiva Sutras_. First of all, that you um follow attentively, and if you discover a _Sutra_ uh which speaks directly to you or which gives you some insight, you know, then you retain it and you share it at the end uh when we have our uh sharing. Or if you are very bright and very inspired you can make your own _Sutra_. It is not uh impossible, you know. Sometimes, I've asked my students uh to condense uh uh something into a _Sutra_. It may be not even necessarily in Sanskrit. It can be also uh English _Sutra_. Why not? But it has to be extremely brief and contain uh a deep uh meaning.

>So before going to the _Sutras_, let us start with the _Maṅgala_. So _Maṅgala_ means auspicious, auspicious--auspicious words uh benedictory words at the beginning of any um text, of any teaching. And um here we have two _Maṅgala_ verses uh to our text. The first one which we have recited and in the translation:

>Say the the sound of the drum which brings about creation, so that by the sound is destruction or dissolution or reabsorption; by the fire in his left hand, then um protection. Actually what is translated as um _sthiti_, maintenance, is um--Swami Ji always used to translate it as "protection"--because ah that is why it is the _abhaya mudrā_, the _mudrā_ of protection. Protection means what has been created, what has been attained, has to be protected. This is the _abhaya mudrā_. And _tirodhāna_, the most difficult um act of Śiva to understand. This veiling or obscuration. Why does He obscure Himself? Why does He not simply reveal Himself? But ah there are many ah both theological and psychological interpretations, that without veiling, without obscuration there is no grace. So it is like the--in photo, old-time photography--you have the negative and the positive. So without the negative the positive will not come out. So obscuration is um represented by Him trampling up on this Apasmāra Puruṣa. That means, and he he actually embodies our ego, he embodies the _ahaṁkāra_. So obscuration means that--obscuring the negative sides, suppressing the negative. And this Apasmāra mostly is looking up, you know, because by the very act of being touched by Śiva's foot he is liberated. So that's just the starting point for--by destroying his ego--um he he he is liberated. And liberation is His pointing to the foot which is raised. Means raising, rising from that heaviness, from that obscuration, from that um--and the hand which points at the raised foot. 

>So this is a traditional representation of the five acts um which actually in Kashmir I don't think uh that we have any image. But uh a lot has been destroyed, maybe. But I have not seen any image in Kashmir. But in any case, the conception was very much there, ah: creation, maintenance, reabsorption um veiling or obscuration, and grace. And of course ah I'm not going into this. I mean um Abhinavagupta says at the beginning of the um um _Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa_ that all these four acts have no--only one purpose, and that is grace. Everything from starting from creation. If you ask, "Why creation?" Every act has the ultimate aim is _anugraha_, is to bestow grace. God's grace means liberation.

>Now, this is a common Śaiva uh theological and um mythological and iconographic, etcetera um belief. But what is the difference in the non-dualistic understanding? Is that these are not only the five acts of Śiva. They are our own. Every conscious being performs these five acts. But first of all, we are not conscious. And then our acts are limited. Śiva's acts are unlimited. So we have the capacity to create. So any artist among you knows that. Uh creation is in our capacity, but we have a limited capacity. We cannot create everything. So ah we come--we will come later--the text will come to this. But all the five acts are the conscious--every conscious being is capable. And this is the great um the non-dualistic insight, that whatever are the um powers of Śiva are also our own powers. But we have to discover them and we have to um remove that veil precisely which uh covers this. 

>So "_namaḥ śivāya satatam pañcakṛtyavidhāyine_." This is the first line. Now, _sata_tam means not eternally in any kind of ah distant eternity, but means constantly, every moment--moment for moment. It's not something which happens that there was a big bang and there was a _sṛṣṭi_. And then there was something uh and then there was going uh maintenance. And then there will be the end of the world, and so on. No, no. It is going on. You can observe it from from uh every cell in our body, you know, it is uh born again, it is maintained, it is--it is uh dissolved again. So the body itself. Nature! Look at nature. It it creates something fresh, and again it it is um uh destroyed, etcetera. So the whole world. These five um funk--these five processes are constantly going on. And simultaneously. And that is another great um aspect of the spirituality of Kashmir Śaivism: simultaneity. Things are not in a temporal sequence, like a baby is born, then it grows, and then it then it becomes old, and then it then it dies, and so on. No, but all these processes are simultaneously present. _Satatam_. So that is the meaning of _sata_tam. But now in the second line comes exactly that non-dualistic meaning: "_cidānandakhanasvātmaparamārthā'vabhāsine_." _Avabhāsa_ um means uh manifestation of one's true identity as nothing but a condensation of consciousness and bliss, or of the bliss of consciousness, _cidānanda_. _Cidānandakhana svātma_. Of one's own--one's own. So the uh the _cidānanda_ is the characteristic of Śiva. He He is the full of consciousness and bliss. But this is our own uh consciousness uh fullness of consciousness and bliss: _paramārthā'vabhāsine_. And that which manifests the Supreme reality, _paramārtha_. It manifests the Supreme reality.

>Now, let us uh ah those who can read Devanāgarī uh we can recite the second um _maṅgala_ in the same tune. It is not on the uh recording. Hmm. "_śaṅkarūpanniṣatsārapratiprativijñāmahodadhitasya śemenodṛtya tetsārasaṁsāraviṣaśāntaye śaṅkarūpanniṣatsāraprativijñāmahodadhitasya śemenodṛtya tetsārasaṁsāraviṣaśāntaye_." And the translation of ah Jaidev Singh: "Out of the great ocean of the doctrine of Recognition, which is the quintessence of the secret doctrine concerning Śaṅkara"--means Śiva--"is brought out the cream by Kṣemarāja to nullify the poison of _saṁsāra_." 

>Now here there is also an image uh lying uh underlying these words. That is the the the image of--at the beginning of creation--the gods and the demons. They were um churning the milk ocean. And in that churning uh there was coming out poison. And that poison, the the the gods didn't know how to deal with it. And then they asked uh Śiva to--they said he only can--he only can save us from this poison. And this myth is a very ecological meaning. Because ah this--precisely what is happening, you see--the poison is also created, and it is uh poisoning the whole environment. And what Śiva does? He has the power--he swallows that poison. It gets stuck in his throat. It doesn't go down. And that's why he's called Nīlakaṇṭha: he's uh blue-throated. So this is the image uh lying behind here. The this ocean uh which has been churned by the gods and the demons. There is the poison, and then the nectar. So the nectar coming out from that churning. But here, that ocean is the ocean of _prativijñā_, of the knowledge of Recognition. "_Prativijñāmahodadhe_." The great ocean of. And from this great ocean he has extracted the essence of the secret doctrine of Śaṅkara, of Śiva. _Upaniṣat_ does not refer only to the traditional _Upaniṣads_ um the end of the Veda. But _upaniṣad_ is often used just for a secret doctrine of the--the highest secret doctrine. "_Śaṅkarūpaniṣat_." So the very philosophy of _prativijñā_ is called the _Upaniṣad_ of Śiva, "_śaṅkarūpaniṣat_." And he is taking out its essence. 

>Now, this _sāra_ um also refers to the brevity of this text now. Because this vast ocean of uh literature, of this philosophical texts, and he has churned out just the essence. As it being uh churned out by Kṣema--by Kṣemendra "_udṛtya_." He he has taken out the essence in order to "_saṁsāraviṣaśāntaye_," in order to pacify or to subdue the poison of _saṁsāra_. So that essence, the antidote for the poison of _saṁsāra_. And and here that this knowledge of uh Śiva, or this Śaiva philosophy, has been called a great ocean um it is again by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on the _Svacchandatantra_ where at the end of the _tantra_ um the text it is summed up: "_Tatsarvaṁ kathitaṁ devi śivajñānamahodadhau_." And this is the the great ocean of the knowledge of Śiva, _Svacchandatantra_. And Kṣemarāja explains it thus, quote: "Because the _Śivajñāna_ is deep, and it is--" 

>Attune you to the spirit of the text. It has several functions uh--I mean praising the deity um and putting yourself into that spirit, into that atmosphere of the text um and that is why singing it, reciting it, gives a different flavor than just uh reading a translation. And from the very beginning, first of all he places uh this text in the entire Śaiva tradition by saying that Śiva has these five functions. So he encompasses the entire Śaiva tradition. But then he gives it that non-dualistic interpretation that these five acts are our own um. So it's not our individual identity, but our identification with the Divine, with Śiva, which can lead us to this _prativijñā_. And um it's also implied here that the real--this um _paramārtha_, this real ultimate nature--is the bliss of consciousness. And what is our task, our um possibility, is to feel that pulsation of um self-awareness, of that bliss of consciousness, in each and every perception. And this is what is in the uh _saṃvedana_ uh in the Krama system, that every perception can lead us to this self uh recognition, if our awareness is--becomes more and more subtle, more and more uh internalized. 

>Now we begin with the introduction to the text. So I'm not reading the whole Sanskrit because some of you will be uh got at least partially: "_iyaṃ īśvarakumāramate ‘kṛta-dīkṣāṇāṃ tārkikaśāstrapari- pariśramāśaktipātaunmiṣitaparameśvarasamāveśābhilāṣiṇāṃ katicit- bhaktibhajatīśvaraprativijñā- upadeśatatvaṃ manāk unmīlyate_." This is a very important sentence. See, every uh text in the Indian tradition has to state also for whom it is composed, what is the purpose of the text. They are very systematic. And so for whom is this--for whom does he compose this text? He says there are some people who are not so highly trained in logic and--logic and philosophy, and um but still they should not be excluded from getting this knowledge of uh recognition, self-recognition. "_Sukumāramati_." _Sukumāramati_ means those who have a tender mind. I mean the people who are very sharp mind, who can study logic and uh those who are--have a tender mind, who are not so um sharp. Um But so the--who have not undertaken the trouble of studying these uh logical texts. Because the whole literature is full of logic also. I mean the um _prativijñā_ uh "_īśvaraprativijñā-vimarśinī-vivr̥ti- vimarśinī_," there's a lot of logic. But don't worry! Even if you have not studied logic, you still have access to this knowledge uh without making so much effort.  "_Śaktipātaunmiṣita- parameśvarasamāveśābhilāṣiṇāṃ_." But the condition--condition is: you must have a desire to enter, or to be united, with the Supreme Lord. And that desire itself has blossomed, or has come about by the grace of the Lord, _śaktipāta_, by the descent of power which uh has awakened that desire to be united with the Supreme Lord.  "_Parameśvarasamāveśābhilāṣiṇāṃ_." So without that _śaktipāta_, without even a slight degree of Divine grace, we would not be sitting here. We wouldn't have that desire to study these texts. We wouldn't have the desire to sit in meditation, to practice, and so on. So there's something has touched us. Something. And that something is _śakti_. That is the Divine energy. So _śaktipāta_ is sometimes translated as "descent." It's not--not that something descends from above, but it is um the _pāta_ means that's something unexpected. Again uh _śaktipāta_ means some unexpected um--that's why we translated it as grace, because grace is also something both unexpected and undeserved. That Abhinavagupta makes it very clear. So you don't need to uh deserve it. I- It comes undeserved and unexpected. But that great desire, _abhilāṣā_, to be united with the Supreme Lord, "_parameśvarasamāveśa_." Now, this _samāveśa_ is a very, very important word. It means uh total possession by. And this is uh you know, in _yoga_ you have _samādhi_. _Samādhi_ also uh happens in the uh Śaiva Yoga, of course. But _samādhi_ is the lower stage, and _samāveśa_ is the higher state. _Samāveśa_ means, on the one hand, that you are possessed by that Divine, and that the Divine possesses you. It can uh be in both ways. I mean some _āveśa_--we have this two uh prefixes: "_sam_" means completely; "_ā_" means entering; "_viś_" means to enter. So completely entering: either you do it, you enter completely into the Divine, or the Divine enters completely in you. Both movements are there in _samāveśa_. And uh this term is so important because we are in a _Tantric_ tradition. And in _Tantra_ this is the phenomenon which happens very frequently. That is the phenomenon of possession. Possession by mainly by Devī, by the Divinity. Well, there are also possession by Bhairava. Uh, so _samāveśa_ is uh--therefore, it's more powerful than _samādhi_. _Samādhi_ is one of the stages of _yoga_, all right. But _samāveśa_--_samāveśa_ is the complete possession: being possessed by, being pervaded by uh entering completely into this _parameśvara_, the Supreme Lord. So and and the condition is "_bhaktibhaja_." So those who have who have devotion, who have a share in devotion. So without _bhakti_, even knowledge is not possible. And this is not just in Śaiva or in any other Indian system. Even in the Christian tradition: love and knowledge always go together. Knowledge without love is uh completely dry. And uh Abhinavagupta often calls it _śuṣka_, you know, like uh the systems like Sāṃkhya, Nyāya, you know, they're completely dry. There's uh no no _rasa_ um and um so that devotion um is necessary even for that knowledge. "_Teṣāṃ īśvaraprativijñā- upadeśatatvaṃ manāk unmīlyate_." So in this world there are some devoted people who are under--and uh this is very significant.

>"_Citi_ is pure consciousness." _Shiva Sutras_ starts with "_cetanā ātmā svātantrā_," absolutely free, is the cause, "_viśva-sṛṣṭi-hetu_," of the perfection of all perfections. And there are different interpretations: na of "_viśva-sṛṣṭi_." This absolutely free consciousness is the cause of all perfections. All that exists in this absolute _city_ um of its own free will is the cause of the _city_ of the universe. In this case, "_city_" means the accomplishment. Now, there are different interpretations, the five different explanations of this _sūtra_. And this is the point of this _sūtra_, you know, because they contain so many uh meanings that uh you can go on uh expanding it in different directions. Now, _citi_, and this is um as uh the Professor Sanderson says: The Shaivas are actually crypto-śāktas. The _śakti_ is so important that um and all the words for consciousness are also feminine. And uh the Sanskrit um uh _pandits_ and philosophers, they also play with the gender of the words. Not _cetanā_, of course. _Cetanā_ is not feminine, but uh _citi_ and um _samvit_. Um, so this consciousness is a _śakti_, is a power. And this power is absolutely independent, "_svātantrā_." Uh _svātantrā_ is so important that it is uh contained in the very first _sūtra_. The whole tradition has also been called "_svātantriya-vāda_." And this is the only Indian philosophy--in all the systems--which has this freedom or independence as its central concept: _svātantriya_. There there is no other philosophy which has freedom, autonomy, as the central power. And this freedom is a power, is a _śakti_. 

>"_Citi svātantrā_. This power of consciousness is absolutely independent or autonomous. And this autonomous or free consciousness is the cause of the perfection of everything. Now, _city_ uh everybody knows the word "_city_" um which has um a particular meaning in _yoga_. But that would be only one aspect. But _city_ means perfection, accomplishment, in a more general sense also than just only some yogic powers uh which you--which are obtained as a kind of by the way, you know. If you go that way and the _cities_, they may come uh by the way, but they are not the aim what you're uh aiming at. But they may happen. But they are not to be sought after, as even Patañjali says in the _Yoga-sūtra_." 

>Now, so this aspect of independence, of freedom, is absolutely central to the whole uh philosophy. And um when I have shown here before the three _shaktis_, you know, _icchā-jñāna-kriyā_. But above that, there are some more uh energies which are completely united with Shiva: the _cit_ and _ānanda_. And>And still above _cit_ there is _svātantrya-śakti_. _Svātantrya-śakti_ is the power of Shiva which comprises all the others. Because it is only because of his free--total freedom--that all the other energies are manifested. So this _city_--this consciousness--does not have any particular name or form. It is that universal consciousness which is beyond any name and form. But it is definitely feminine! It's definitely a feminine. It's a _śakti_, the _śakti_. 

>"_Viśva_" means universe. Now, according to Shaiva uh all the Shaiva _Tantras_ uh the universe um is consists of a hierarchy of levels um of elements or--which are called the _tattvas_. The universe consists--according to Shaivism--of 36 elements of reality. And out of which 25 are the same as in Sāṅkhya, like the five elements of uh cosmic elements and then uh and then like the sense organs, and so on. This is all groups of five. Five, five, five, five. So 25 in Sāṅkhya, plus 11 in Shaivism. So I'm not going into details, but since this comes again and again uh we have to have it before our eyes when he refers um to a certain level uh of these _tattvas_. Now, _viśva_, he says here, the universe means "_viśvasya sadāśivādī bhūmy-antasya_," starting from Sadāśiva down to the Earth. So there are always two movements in all these hierarchies um and these hierarchies are not just theoretical. They are also um to be experienced. For example, in initiation you have to go through all these levels of the _tattvas_. The whole--that is a typical _Tantric_ phenomena again, that the whole of reality from the lowest to the highest has to be integrated. You cannot leave out anything. Nothing is to be left out: the lowest, the most material, to the most spiritual. They are all integrated. That's why this hierarchy of the _tattvas_. And there are two movements: one is the descending--here he says "from Sadāśiva down to the Earth"--and the other is ascending. And the creative um movement of course, it does a descent. And in the movement of liberation there is an ascent. So _sṛṣṭi-krama_ and _saṃhāra-krama_.

>Now, in this um "_viśva_" means from Sadāśiva down to the Earth. So why Sadāśiva? I'm not going into--see, Shiva as a _tattva_ has different levels of manifestation. This is not the Supreme Godhead. Um this would be Paramaśiva, who is beyond the _tattvas_. But Shiva as a _tattva_, when we can talk about him, we can we can uh make a _mūrti_ of him, we can make a uh image, or we can--this is all at the level of the _tattvas_. It is not the uh transcendent Paramaśiva or uh yeah Paramaśiva. And Sadāśiva is that manifestation of Shiva from whom the creation uh starts downwards. 

>So you can see there. So of the universe or _viśva_ means from Sadāśiva down to the Earth. "_City_" means "in effectuation, as bringing about uh _sṛṣṭi_, or manifestation, _sthiti_, or continued existence, and _saṃhāra_, or resting in the highest experience." So you see _saṃhāra_. As I said before, _saṃhāra_ is mostly translated by "destruction." But the word itself doesn't--"_sam_" means "together," and "_hṛ_" means collecting together. So whatever has been expanded in manifestation has to be again collected in uh recollected, re- um absorbed into unity. So _saṃhāra_ is not at all destruction! But here he says beautifully: "_para-pramātṛ-viśrānti_." This uh _saṃhāra_, this uh reabsorption, means a resting in the Supreme subject: "_para-pramātṛ-viśrānti_." So it's something absolutely positive! Because coming to rest, you know, we are so much spread out into this multiplicity of manifestation, and at some point it has to be reabsorbed into that resting in the supreme subject, _para-pramātṛ_. Supreme subject is, of course, Shiva, Paramaśiva. _Para-pramātṛ-viśrānti_. And that is _saṃhāra_. 

>"_Parā-śakti-rūpā citi-bhagavatī_." So what I said before is uh Kṣemarāja's own word: that this consciousness is the goddess uh Parā, who has been the um the goal and the content of this another _Tantra_. That is _Parā-triṁśikā_, which is among the highest _Tantras_ in the tradition. _Parā-triṁśikā_ is the the _Tantra_ of uh aiming at the Goddess Parā as the supreme one. And she is _svātantrā_, she is uh absolutely independent. "_Citi-bhagavatī svātantrā anūtrā vimarsha-mayī śiva-bhaṭṭāraka-abhinna-hetu_." And she is the cause um non-separated--non-different--from the the Lord Shiva, "_śiva-bhaṭṭāraka-abhinna_." She's not different from Shiva. So immediately he has to say--because uh he puts so much emphasis on _śakti_. So immediately he says to say, "No, no, this is not different from Shiva." So there's no duality involved at all. But he starts from _śakti_. And whoever has um read or practiced the _Vijñāna-bhairava_ knows that all our experience is only through _śakti_. You cannot experience Shiva except through his energy. And this is um because you cannot experience the the uh the transcendent, the ultimate. That's that--there is where these negations are there. What you can experience is only the energy! And and this energy is the cause. And she is of the nature--"_anūtrā vimarsha-mayī_"--of a reflection uh reflectivity on the absolute, on that "_anūtrā vimarsha-mayī_," who consists of an awareness of ultimate reality.

>Now, _vimarsha_. So this is one of the important conceptual pairs in Kashmir Shaivism: _prakāśa-vimarsha_. The absolute um is uh light of consciousness, and the--and its energy is _vimarsha_: is reflectivity, or is awareness. So what we are doing in our practice, in our both uh intellectual and uh meditational uh practice: that we participate in this _vimarsha_. And _vimarsha_ is--I'm sorry I'm uh it's a little difficult to follow, but I think slowly you will will uh understand the implications. _Vimarsha_--what we are doing in meditation, that doesn't mean we're not using our mind. We're not *supposed* to use our mind. But we are cultivating that awareness. Awareness which is an reflection of that ultimate light of consciousness. "_Vimarsha_ is--" This is a very good translation: "who consists of an awareness of ultimate reality." And "awareness" is where all these translations are very difficult and very uh misleading, you know. The very word "consciousness," and so--it's very difficult. So when you are starting from a dualistic uh mind, you know, everything goes wrong. Because consciousness needs an object? No. It is pure consciousness without object. Awareness: no object. It's pure awareness. So these these terms, and--in translation are very uh misleading. But that's why I have to begin it again to come back to the Sanskrit. 

>_Vimarśa_. Now, what is this uh _city_, this uh accomplishment? It is also--it is the production, or the creation of the uh universe uh which is a--and she, that absolutely independent uh energy, is its cause. And and _city_ um has all these different meanings, and also the accomplishment or the completion, also in that sense. Not only of _sṛṣṭi_, but also of _saṃhāra_, of returning to that resting in that Supreme um high consciousness. And it means the withdrawal, as a perfection of everything, as a unification of everything. And again another translation: "Consciousness--the goddess who is nothing but consciousness--who is the cause of the _city_ of everything: beginning" and so on. But this we had already. Now. Now, when she says "_anuttarā vimarśamayī_," and in one translation--this is Sanderson's--he said, "_anuttarā_," this ultimate um with absolute. It is the zero point uh the the zero point beyond which there is nothing. 

>"_Asyām hi prasarantyāṃ jagad unmiṣati yāvat tiṣṭhati ca na nivṛtta prasāraṃ rayāṃ ca nimiṣati iti svānubhavā eva atrakṣī_." It is only when this ultimate consciousness power comes into play that the universe comes--sorry--comes forth into being. Comes forth into being means opens its eyes. I mean this _unmeṣa_. _Unmeṣa_. It is an expression which we have in the _Spanda Kārikā_. When the Divine opens his eyes, the universe comes into being. When he closes his eyes, the universe gets reabsorbed. So it is a a beautiful image, but it is--is not to be taken literally. This is only when _city_, the ultimate consciousness power, comes into play that the universe comes forth into being and continues as existent. And when it withdraws its movement, the universe also disappears from view, shuts its eyelids. One's own experience would bear witness to this fact: "_svānubhavā eva sākṣī_." See, every um thing with uh--it's not there that you are getting some kind of theology, and a superimposed--you have to *believe* it. No. It is an experience which you can also um follow by your own experience. So what happens at the divine level, it also happens in *your* consciousness. This uh when you go to sleep in the uh uh night, the world disappears. You close your eyes and you go to sleep, the world is no more there. But it's a very individual level. But it is the same uh--I have to select, because it's a very long uh commentary. I think we are coming--yeah. Then uh why this is--this is the only cause he do--and here uh comes um uh against other uh systems. Because um if you--it's only that light, that pure consciousness, which is the cause of everything, and nothing else can be the cause. And there's nothing else that it is directed also against, for example, the Sāṃkhya system, where it is _prakṛti_ um because _prakṛti_ also--it cannot produce anything without that light of consciousness. Because without that light of consciousness, nothing would exist at all, not even _prakṛti_. So this is the--_prakṛti_ means the nature uh primordial nature. And _city_ is that light alone which is the cause. Never is the other one--_māyā_ or _prakṛti_--any cause. Therefore, space, time, and form, which have been brought into being and are vitalized by this consciousness, are not capable of penetrating its real nature, because it is all-pervading, eternal, and completely full in itself: "_paripūrṇarūpā_." 

>Yeah. I think we have to stop here uh with this first uh explanation of the first _sūtra_, and then uh in the afternoon we will finish, of course. And we have to come to to the second _sūtra_. They're totally only 20 _sūtras_. And some--they have to be a little shorter um uh so that we can reach the the final ones which are very, very important for our practice. 
