Namaḥ śivāya. Yaśaś cakraṃ pañca-kṛtya-vidhāyine citānanda-ghana-svātma-parama-ārthabhāṣine. Namaḥ śivāya. Yaśaś cakraṃ pañca-kṛtya-vidhāyine citānanda-ghana-svātma-parama-ārthabhāṣine. Eṣmāṃ drupa-samāveśaḥ svāmananātmānivāraṇe śivaprabodha janayā namaścaktyātmadatmane. Eṣmāṃ drupa-samāveśaḥ svāmananātmānivāraṇe śivaprabodha janayā namaścaktyātmadatmane. 

First the meaning, and then we'll repeat it. Is it on? This is the *maṅgala-śloka* by Somananda to his *Śivadṛṣṭi*, and this is the most extreme expression of nondualism. In the translation by Newley, that Shiva who is co-penetrated with my own being prays Shiva in his extended form through his own power. Shiva who obscures himself by himself, or that Shiva that Swami Lakṣmaṇjū, who has taken the form of my individual being, offers salutation to his his universal being Shiva through the medium, which is also Lord Shiva, for the removal of obstacles, which are also one with Shiva. The purpose is to unite the indi- individual being with the universal being. That is uh at; even the obstacles are also Shiva.

Today is Swami Lakṣmaṇjū's birthday according to [the] Western calendar, and they eve- in the evening we will see some videos um video clippings. By kindness of honorable Agācchita, he has prepared um some clippings from his teachings, so that will be after the dinner if we don't take too much time for dinner, and we can uh have that at 6:30. Then uh so I I announce it again in the afternoon.

So we have yester- we have reached the turning point of the entire text, and uh uh it requires some patience. But I mean, all these authors, they go into great detail to analyze the condition of bondage before we can reach the state of liberation. So once you have; this is like an an modern uh psychotherapy or psychoanalysis. First you have to analyze what are the causes of bondage be- before you can reach the state of *jīvanmukti*, and this is the goal. The goal is nothing less but liberation in this life with this body, and this is much more difficult than uh getting liberation at death, *videhamukti*. 

So this turning point is with sūtra 13, where the whole um externalization of our sense perception is turned inward: *tamukhi budhaḥ  antamokhi-bhāvaḥ*. And actually, this has a parallel, but I don't want to go into comparisons. But in the Upaniṣads, in the Kathā Upaniṣad, the whole turning point of the Upaniṣads is that one verse, Kathā Upaniṣad 4.1, where it says that the creator has created this human body with the senses like windows going outside, but a particular sage, Kacchidīra, he turned in search of immortality; he turned his gaze within and found the *ātman*. So this is the turning point in the Upaniṣads, and here the same thing: we are [the] tendency is outgoing, and that outgoing tendency is something which is given with the body. But that sage Kacchidīra, in search of imm- *amṛtatvam*, it's um *āvṛta cakṣuḥ*. Then the Upaniṣads say *āvṛta cakṣuḥ*, turning his gaze within he found the self, the *ātman*, directly. So here, this uh *antamukhi-bhāvaḥ*. 

So the uh commentary is just only a a repetition, in a positive way, of what has been said negatively in the previous sūtra, and that's why it can be done relatively quickly. On page 86 um in the book. 

So the difference is between *aparijñāna* and *parijñāna*. *Parijñāna* of course it is *pratyabhijñā*, but he- it is not explicitly; that term is not used. But *pari* means complete. It's not partial knowledge, and the difference of the conception of ignorance in Vedānta and in Kaśmīr Śaivism is that ignorance here is never a complete ignorance; it's never completely negative. It's just a partial knowledge, so the problem is with our partial knowledge, not complete ignorance. There is always a part of truth. But as long as it is not complete, *pari*- *parijñāna* all around, it cannot liberate us from this thought constructs, from our own imaginations, our own uh um externalizing tendency, etcetera.

*Tasya ātmya-sambandha-kṛtya-kāritvasya parijñāne sati aparijñāna-lakṣaṇa-kāraṇa-apagamāt svaśakti-vyāmohitatā-nivr̥ttāv svātantrya-labhāt prāg-vyākhyātam tat cittam tad-iva saṃkocanīyaṃ bahirmukhatāṃ jahat*. So giving up that externalizing tendency of the mind and the; the rest it is already well-known um after full knowledge and after removing the cause of this ignorance, which was because was to be deluded by one's own powers, *svaśaktiḥ vyāmohitatā-nivr̥ttāv*, and attaining freedom, *svātantrya-labhāt*. So *svātantrya* is from the very first sūtra; it is everywhere stressed that the cause is freedom, whether at the divine level or at the human level.

Then *antamukhi-bhāvenā* by introve- by introversion he *cetanā-padam atyāruhat* and rising to the state of a conscious being, consciousness, individual um personified consciousness *grāhaka-bhūmikām*, he attains the the uh state of the pure knower, the pure uh subject; *krama-nakramena saṃkocya kalayāpi vikalanenā*, and by dis- dissolving all these contraction, which was the cause of this whole trouble, and *svarūpam apadyate*, by experiencing or realizing one's own real nature, one becomes pure consciousness, *cityā bhavati*. And that means *vāṃcinmayīm parama-bhūmikām āviśati*, the individual enters into his own; we can *cinmayīm* spiritual, ultimate spiritual uh nature or the the ultimate level of his spiritual uh identity with *cit*, with consciousness.

So we have already done this yesterday, but uh it was a repetition. Now, the introduction to sūtra 14. Excuse me. *Svarūpaṃ āpadyate*? Yeah, it was probably probably that's the dictionary today. 

We had the question: *sama apatiḥ  āpatiḥ āpatiḥ*, obtaining um procuring, getting is uh here attaining, attaining. 

*Nānūjyatī-pāramārthikam cit-śakti-padam sakala-bheda-ghavalana-svabhāvam tad asya māyā-pade'pi tathā rūpeṇa pavitryam yathā jalena jaladharācāryasya abhipāno bhāva-avabhāsa-katvam*. 

Question arises: if the power of consciousness, *cit-śakti*, in its highest, in its ultimate aspect, *pāramārthikaṃ*, is of such a nature as um *sakala-bheda-ghavalana-svabhāvam*, which um removes all sense of differentiation, all sense of separation, *bheda*, then even at the stage of *māyā*, which is obscuring power, it should appear in the same uh should be present. If it is so powerful, then why should it not be present at the stage of *māyā* also? Then he uses that nice comparison, says, "Well, the sun illumines objects even if it is covered by clouds." So it's not the pure uh uh, but even if covered by clouds the sun illumines objects. 

*Jaladhārācāryasya abhipāno bhāva-avabhāsa-katvam*. 

Then from sūtra 14:

> *Citte vahnya avarōhapade cannope māttaraya main­danam pluṣyati.*

We have seen yesterday that this consciousness is uh so powerful. It is compared with the fire, the fire which burns the fuel of the differentiation of the objects um and this burning means assuming it into herself. So there are two images: one is the eating, digesting, and the other is burning. So the fire of consciousness, *citte vahnya*. Even when it descends, *avarōhapade*, at the lowest stage, although it is hidden, *cannope*, to a limited extent, it burns the fuel of the known, burns the fuel of the objectivity, *mey*. We had this uh uh in the terminology of *citte cetanā* um *citta, caitya*. *Caitya* is the known, the known object, or *mey* uh uh *pramātī pramāṇa pramey*, etcetera. 

So it burns the fuel of the known, that those objects which always distract us to um external, *bāhyamukhatā*, externality. 

*Cittir eva  cittir eva viśvagrasanā śīlatvād vahni*. 

So consciousness, because it is the capacity to to absorb the whole universe, it is like a fire. Just remember the image of Naṭarāja, which we have seen; he is in the um circle of fire. So that doesn't mean just *saṃhāra*, destruction, but it means this, you know, that this consciousness power is like a fire which consumes uh makes everything one [with] its own. So there are so many images with this fire, you know, about the fuel, you know, if the fuel is wet it cannot be burned. So means if our uh we are not um ready to get completely absorbed in that, then then there is something remains, some uh. But that complete burning means a complete absorbing in itself in this consciousness.

It is uh of the externality of the known, *asau eva avarōhapade*, and and its state of descending at the lower level, *māyā pramātī tāyāṃ*, even at the in the state of the limited individual, at the level of *māyā*, even though it is hidden, *cannope*, *svātantryād āhota* of its own freedom *ācarita svabhāvope*, that means even if its own real nature is hidden, *bhūribhūte canna agni­vat māttaraya aṃśena*, it partially, it burns uh partially. 

And this, what is this fuel? This fuel is the perception of *nīlapīta ādi*. Its means the external perception. The examples are always given of the colors: blue, yellow. The the external perceptions are that fuel which is burned. 

*Pluṣyati* means, and what means burning? *Svātmasāt­karotī*, and this is a beautiful expression; it will come in the next *sūtra*. *Svātmasāt­karotī* means it makes it its own, making it one's own. So it is nothing negative, this burning; it's nothing uh the uh image does not imply a negativity, but making it its own, completely absorbing it into its own nature, her own nature. 

*Ātmasāt­karotī māttā padasya idaṃ āhutaṃ yatkavalayana api sarvā sarvātmayena nāgrasate ivana*. 

If the um in spite of its being *yā*, being veiled, even as fire burns the fuel though covered by ashes. So he has a; Tārif Siṃha has an explanation in bracket that since the objects of knowledge are assimilated by consciousness to itself, their difference is annihilated, etcetera. *Saṃskārā* partially *saṃskārātmanā uddāpayati*.

Now, if the this fuel is not burned completely, the whole image of fire. If the fuel is not burned completely, there [are] some *saṃskāra* [that] are left, some leftover, which again makes it rise. That means the impressions of the objects; suppose you go into meditation and you get absorbed into that pure consciousness, but if that is not complete, then some the some *saṃskāra* remain. When you get out of meditation, you again; they they emerge, they reappear. So this is something is leftover from this burning of the externalization.  So though devouring the object of knowledge, it does not consume it wholly but only partly because it again makes it rise by means of the *saṃskāra*. 

*Krāskatvam ca sarva pramātṛṇāṃ svānubhavata eva siddham*. 

But all experience have the power of devouring or assimilating objects of experience to consciousness. That is a matter of one's own: *svīyā anubhavata eva siddham*, is established by one's own consciousness, by one's own experience. And then he quotes one verse from Uddapaladeva, *Śivasūtravārttika*. Even the gods, *vartante janmabho jantavo aśeṣā api brahmēndra viṣṇavaḥ grasamānāstato vande devaviśvaṃ bhavananmayaṃ*. Since all creatures, even Brahmā, Indra, and Viṣṇu, go on devouring or assimilating. Therefore, O God, I adore the universe that is of your own form. That is your own being. *Vande devaviśvaṃ bhavananmayaṃ*. 

This is a poetic form of the *Śivasūtravārttika*. There are many such uh verses which would be fitting. 

Now um the introduction to the next *sūtra*, which is: *etena yadā punaḥ karaṇeśvarī prasara saṃkocana saṃpādyā sarva saṃhāra krama pariśīlana yuktim āviśati*. There is one word we wanted to look [up] in the dictionary: *pariśīlana*. That just; alternate translations; *pariśīlana*.  Yeah. The introductory. 

When, however, by accomplishing the flowing out or forth going of the divine senses, the aspirant adopts the means of the practice of emanation, that means again bringing forth the objects of sense, which corresponds to creation, to emanation, and by accomplishing the *saṃkocana*, withdrawing, of the senses, adopts the means of the practice of *saṃhāra*, of withdrawal. So here you see that the five acts have been come under his control; he can produce, he can bring it forth, and he can destroy it. He is not under their control, but they are under his control. Then what happens? *Balalābhe viśvam ātmasātkarotī*. *Pariśīlana* means touch, contact; this is already in the original meaning: constant contact, intercourse or correspondence, study, application or attachment, steady or fixed pursuit. So it's interesting [that] the maybe have many words for practice, *abhyāsa* etc., but *pariśīlana* is different. You have to be in touch with the subject, and to be in this constant pursuit of something. That's why he goes again and again; he says *pariśīlana*. You be in touch, you be um engaged, study, but study in the sense of um constant application. Nothing very loose, but very much engaged.  

Yeah. The introductory. 

On attaining the power, *bala*. So here clearly, I mean, *śakti* is a different concept; *bala* is [a] different concept. *Bala* is; without power, you cannot do any um spiritual practice, and that is also clear in the *Spandakārikā*: *balalābhe viśvam ātmasātkarotī*. And this is a very powerful expression. By on attaining the power and spiritual power, he unites the universe with himself, or he makes, assimilates the universe to himself. This *ātmasāt­karotī*, this is what the fire does with the fuel; it makes it its own. The fuel becomes fire. It's a transformation. It's a process of transformation. It's not, I mean, both in physics and in uh kaśmīra śaivism, nothing gets lost. Energy never gets lost; it's only transformed. So the fuel does not get lost, but it gets transformed. 

*Viśvam ātmasādkarotī*. 

Now this is a very powerful expression. And uh it reminded me at the end of; I don't know if anybody of you has ever had a touch with Abhinavagupta's *Tantrāloka*? Anybody? Yes, you, of course. Anyhow, it's a a massive work describing all the means um prior to liberation and the whole um ritual of initiation, etcetera. But it's a complete tāntrik uh compendium for practice and uh and also theory. And at the very end of this great work, Abhinavagupta expresses a prayer to Śiva. It's so moving, you know. He has composed; he, such a great master, composed this massive work. At the end he says, "O Śiva, accept this. This is an offering to you. And by this offering, make the universe your own." *Viśvam ātmasād kuru*. He uses the same word. The universe is already Śiva's, but by his offering this work; you see, this is that the main purpose is that everything should be integrated into this divine uh you integrate everything into your uh divinity. 

*Viśvam ātmasād kuru*. 

And this, again and again, we have repeated that in the tantrik spirituality, nothing is to be left out. It's nothing partial. You do a little bit of *pūjā*? It's okay; the rest, let it go. Or you do a little yoga, or you do a little meditation. But it has to be a complete; it has to be all-embracing. So unless it covers this *viśva*, this whole universe, which was there in the first *sūtra*, this practice is not complete. This experience is not complete. 

*Viśvam ātmasādkarotī*. 

But for this you need that power, *bala*. Unless you acquire that power, this completeness cannot be taking place, cannot happen.

*Citiḥ eva dehā prāṇā prāṇādi ācādanena nimajjanenā svarūpam unmagnatv ena sphārayantī balam*. 

Consciousness herself is that power which by, and this again these two images we had it also in the *Śivasūtra*, submerging and emerging. Submerging, *nimajjana*, submerging this um this hiding of this consciousness by uh the body, the *prāṇa*, etcetera. Means by identification with body, *prāṇa*, etcetera. Submerging one's own true nature, *svarūpam*, by identification with body, vital energy, etcetera. And by making uh it emerge. Submerging that false identification and making it emerge um *unmagnatv ena*, making this consciousness emerge. Here this is the power. This is *bala*. And um here he quotes the *Spandakārikā*. This is a clear reference to the *Spandakārikā*, but where it is uh in the context of the power of *mantra*: *tadākramya balam mantrāḥ sarvajña balaśālinā pravartan te'dhikārāya karaṇā karaṇāni eva*. 

And this is now very important. You separated *cit-aikātmya-pratipatti-dārḍhyam*. *Dārḍhya* means stability or firmness, *dṛḍhatā*. One may have many uh great experiences. But if they are not firm, if they are not stabilized, then there isn't; you may lose it again. But *dārḍhya*, this firmness, stability, of this *pratipatti*, precisely what we have just seen, this; it's not just knowledge, it is uh gaining, but gaining in the sense of uh consciousness. The firmness of that experiencing, you can translate it also as experiencing the unity with pure consciousness, *cit-aikātmya*. Unity with pure consciousness, and that firmness, that stability, that is liberation in this very life, when the body, etcetera, are still experienced. And this is precisely this is the challenge because um to integrate, and that's why he has taken so much trouble here now to explain this whole limitation, etcetera, because integrating the body and making the universe, integrating the universe, integrating the whole of reality, and burning it into oneness, burning it into that fire of consciousness, which we had as *cit-agni* before, *cit-vahni*, which burns everything into unity. *Cit-aikātmya-pratipatti-dārḍhyam jīvanmuktiḥ*. Beautiful. And the condition of, or the simultaneous uh what is happening simultaneously, is attaining the bliss of consciousness. So consciousness is never without bliss. *Cidānanda*. And to the; and difference to the Vedāntic, uh they always say *saccidānanda*, and the śaivite, they never say *saccidānanda*; it's only *cidānanda*, because *sat* is anyhow is already there. They don't need to mention it, and they have also a different concept of *sat*, and uh but *cidānanda*, the bliss of consciousness, it is never something uh consciousness cannot be without that blissful aspect.

*Cidānandalābha dehādau deheṣu cetaneṣu api cit-aikātmya-pratipatti-dārḍhyam jīvanmuktiḥ*. *Viśva-ātma-sāt-kārātmanā samāveśa rūpe cidānande labdhe*. 

Now, this *cidānanda*, this bliss of consciousness, is in the form of absorption, *samāveśa*, which has already made its own, *viśva-ātmasāt karoti*, which has already integrated the universe in itself. And this is now very important. 

*Jāgratāvasthāyām vallak- uh dalla-kalpatayā deha-prāṇa-nīla-sukhādiṣu ābhāsamāneṣu api*. 

Even in the state of wakefulness, there are two states: *samādhi* and *vyutthāna*. This is also in the *Yogasūtra*. *Samādhi*, absorption; *vyutthāna*, external consciousness. Literally, it means "rising up". So when you get up from *samādhi*, you open your eyes, and you perceive; this is *vyutthāna*. *Vyutthāna*. So even in the state of external consciousness, *vyutthāna daśāyām*, which in which all these uh things appear again: the body, the breath, and the external experiences, like blue, and uh internal experiences, like happiness, all these things appear again. *Dalla-kalpatayā* is a very nice uh comparison. Like the petals of a lotus, *dalla-kalpatayā*. All these um external experiences, *ābhāsamāneṣu*, they appear even in the state of external consciousness, *vyutthāna*. 

*Yatsamāveśasaṃskārabbalāt pratibhāti śyamānā, yuktikramoktātmā-pramāt cit-aikātmya-pratipatti-dārḍhyam avicala- avicala* and because of the power of the impression of *samādhi*. Now, this is something you retain because there's a special sūtra afterwards. Suppose you have been practicing meditation, and then you are going out, and you're [in] some other state of awareness. But the impression remains. If you have entered once into deep *samādhi*, it will leave its impression. We always speak of *saṃskāras* only in a negative sense, uh of *karma* and of uh negative things. But no. This, whatever uh experiences you had in meditation, or any mystical experience, it leaves its traces, and these traces are uh they can be cultivated. This is *samādhi-saṃskāra*, not *karma-saṃskāra*. So *samādhi-saṃskāra*, *samāveśa-saṃskāra*. Well, we prefer the um *samāveśa*, that complete absorption. You cannot uh get rid of these traces or the power of the traces of that absorption.

And; and there is firmness in the consciousness of identity with *cit*, that is, there is; [I] come to some more concrete. She is the center, in as much as she is present as the innermost reality, *sarvāntaratamatvena sarvāntaratamatvena*, innermost innermost reality of all, *sarva*. So matter here in a very universal sense, the the innermost, deepest reality of everything, is that God consciousness, *saṃvit evā bhagavatī*. Because she is present as the innermost reality in everything that *pithilagna tāṃ venā*. A- and nothing can exist without her as the ground, without her as support: *na kasyacit api*. And nothing can attain its own true nature, *svarūpaṃ na upapadyate*. Nothing can attain its own essential nature without that God consciousness, you know. It is not an abstract concept; it is not; but it is the center of your experience, the innermost center of experience. 

And *sattu māyāprad a māyā daśayāṃ tadā bhūtāpi svarūpaṃ guhāyatvā*, and she, even in the state of the obscurity um power of *māyā*, she still; she has the same nature, but in a hidden um hidden way. So in spite of being so; in spite of its being the innermost reality and ground of every possible thing, according to the dictum, "Yes." 

Now, *prāksaṃvit prāṇe vai rinatā*. This I should also write it. This is a saying of the sage Kallata, who was the first disciple of Vasugupta. Vasugupta was the one who revealed the *Śivasūtras*, and his disciple Kallata; we don't have any complete work by Kallata, but we have some um some sayings which are generally being quoted. *Prāksaṃvit prāṇe vai rinatā*. Consciousness first manifests in *prāṇa*, in vital breath. The first manifestation of consciousness is in *prāṇa*, and that is why *prāṇa*, every spiritual practice, has to start with *prāṇa*: *prāksaṃvit prāṇe vai rinatā*. Because consciousness does not remain without being manifest, but she manifests in *prāṇa*, and then *prāṇa* becomes the medium to return back to that consciousness through *prāṇa*. So *prāṇa* is the mediator between the body and consciousness. That's why all these practices which uh you have in yoga, etc., uh with *prāṇa*. It it ya according to this principle. 

*Prāṇaśaktibhūmiṃ  svikṛtya avarohākramena buddhi dehādi  um bhavam atiśam a adi atiśayanā nāḍīsahasrasāra sāranim anusṛtya anusṛtā*. 

Now, accepting the the the power of the the level of the power of *prāṇa*, *prāṇaśaktibhūmiṃ  svikṛtya*. Because now it's a question of practicing how to reach that matter, how to experience that matter. So one has to take hold of the power of *prāṇa*, the vital uh energy, *svikṛtya*. In the order of descent, descending from that pure *citta*: *buddhi dehādi  bhavam atiśayanā*. And um following, resting, in the planes of the intellect, the body, uh and etc. *Atiśayanā* means resting and the level of the intellect, the body, etcetera. It follows the course of the thousand *nāḍīs*. Now the; now we come finally to yoga, to the yogic analysis of the body, the yogic body. Now, this *nāḍīs*, this is a very common uh; it's already in the Upaniṣads, in the Upaniṣads, the analysis of the body by way of *cakras* and *nāḍīs*, etcetera. Now, [a] "thousand *nāḍīs*" means the body consisting of um all these energy channels. And he has; this is the the natural um; this is not yet the yogic *nāḍīs*; this is just the analysis of the body.

But *tadāpi ca palāśaparṇamadhyaśākhānyāyena ā brahmarandhrāt adhova tra paryantaṃ prāṇaśakti brahmaaśraya madhyamanāḍīrūpadvayā prādurbhāvenāstitā*. 

This is most important now. The primary; there's a beautiful simile, beautiful comparison. I didn't find any. He compares the body with the the structure of *palāśa*; this is not a leaf of *palāśa*, but you can find also [the] people tree, or other uh if you look at [it] against the sun, or against the light, and the structure of the leaf, he says that is the central rib. And in; so in the body there's this *madhyanāḍī*, and the other *nāḍīs*, there um going of- from that central rib. It is a structure which [goes] from the leaf of the tree to the human body to the yogic body, and so many other uh; it is a uh universal structure. So the first meaning he gives to matter is that central *nāḍī*, the central vein, or central channel, in the yogic body. 

*Palāśa* uh *patra*. 

And this is the uh the predominant; it remains principally in the form of *madhyanāḍī*. And starting at; he goes from the top to the bottom, from *brahmarandhra* to the lowest, *adhova tra*. So descending in this descending order, *adhova tra paryantam*. That *prāṇaśakti*, the power of *prāṇa*, the power of um vital breath, or *brahmāśraya madhyama nāḍī rūpadvayā*, is manifested as the central, or in the central uh channel. 

*Brahma brahma brahmāśraya brahmāśraya*, which is whose substratum is *brahman*. So why this is called uh *brahmarandhra*. So *brahman* uh is often the uh the [term] used for terms which are connected with centrality. So it's also; it's called *madhyanāḍī*, also *brahmanāḍī*, *brahmarandhra* uh uh *brahma kṣetra*, many things which [have] nothing to do with any mythological Brahman, but the centrality, centrality, of energy is that uh uh a form of uh is based on *brahman*, on that absolute. It is called *madhyanāḍī*. 

*Tadā evā sarvavṛttinām udayāt tadra evā ca viśrāmāt*. 

And there every thing, all the *vṛttis* means all the functions, arise from that and get to rest in that. So that *madhyanāḍī* is from where all the energy, functions of energy, arise, and in which they get to rest, *viśrāmanti*, *viśrāmat*. All the functions arise and come to rest.

Even though thus constituted, its nature remains hidden to the *paśus*. Although every body has this this uh this structure of the of the subtle body, of course, not of the gross body. So every body has this structure, but if you are deluded um a *paśu* um bound soul, you're not aware of uh this uh subtle structure of the body. It remains hidden, but it is there it in every body. 

Even *bhūtāpi* uh *īśa paśunā nimīlitasvarūpā evā sthitā*. 

It is present in the body of the bound soul, but in a hidden form, in an undiscovered [form].

*Yatato'uktayuktyā kramena sarvāntaratamamatve madhyabhūtā saṃvit bhagavatī vikasate*. 

Now, when this God's consciousness, being the innermost reality of all, *sarvāntaratamamatve madhyabhūtā*, is the center, when she expands, *vikasate*, develops. Madhya he translates it by *vikāsa*, by developing, but I prefer "expansion".

*Tadā tadvikāsāt cidānandasyā' muktas- uktā rūpasyā lābhaprāptirbhavati*. 

So when this central channel, *brahmanāḍī*; yes, it is here, *brahmanāḍī madhyabhūtā brahmanāḍī*. This central channel expands. Then, by this expansion, he attains; the *yogī*, or the practitioner, attains the bliss of consciousness, *cidānandasyā' muktas- uktā rūpasyā lābhaprāptir*. And this is the state of *jīvanmukti*.

Now, he gives a very brief um presentation of this matter, and of course there are other uh; if any one of you is, or has already practiced with, *Vigyanabhairava*; *Vigyanabhairava* has many practices with matter. And of course the heart is one uh important um uh; the matter is identified uh with the heart in many such uh practices of the *Vigyanabhairava*. But the very first identification is with the *madhyanāḍī*. Because the *madhyanāḍī* concerns the whole body. And uh either whether you rise from below up, or you descend from the *brahmarandhra* down, as he says um it, and then all the other *nāḍīs*  they they branch out like in the in the leaf uh of the *balaśā*. So it *madhura ma madhanādi* or *matiānādi* concerns that innermost yogic structu- of the body. And because, before, we had all this divinization of the senses, or the divin- ization uh becoming the divine body, etcetera. But here, this is the the entrance into that is through this matter. And uh; it does not sound very complicated. We have such complex yoga systems, etcetera, etcetera, but it requires that complete *antaḥ- ātmā tva*, that innermost awareness of that innermost reality, which is manifest and which develops or expan- ds in that central vein. That is the only uh only practice here. There is no no other uh; it's mainly then awareness of that innermost power. It is the power also.

Yes. Now we will come to questions. But I think um before we come to questions, I want to give you an one alternative um practice of matter so we can have a better; where is it? Come back. Yeah. Thank you. 

An alternative practice on the *matyā*, or there are many in the *Vighnābhairava*, but this is precisely on the heart. It is um verse 49 of *Vighnābhairava*: *hṛdayākāśe nilīnakṣa padmasaṃ- puttamadhyaga anan- yacetāsubhage paraṃ saubhāgyam āpnoyat*. If one merges one's senses in the space of the heart, at the center between the two halves of the lotus; two halves means one opening above and one below. With an undistracted mind, *ananyacettā*, then, O blessed one, one attains supreme blessedness. So here that *matyā* is the center of the heart lotus, or in between two heart lotuses, and in the interpretation, these two lotuses are interpreted as subjectivity and objectivity: *ahaṃ* and *idam*. So that, again, nothing is excluded. And that space on the hill; we had the meditation on *ākāśa nirākāśa*, this that innermost space, that *antaḥ- ātmā*, this presence of that central consciousness within the space of the heart, between the two lotuses. This is another practice with *matyā*.

Yes. Now the quest-; Mike, Mike, Mike, Mike. Sorry, I was just so curious, because here he's talking about descending, but I think I understood it implicitly in the last thing. So it is descending. Descending, yeah, and ascending into the heart, isn't it? It's not only descending that it can; yes, surely. I mean, this this text is extremely brief. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And there are others you have to complement it with. Yes, definitely. Yeah. Yeah, so you you you came with; yes, definitely, let's take; we had, in the *Yoga of the Netra Tantra*. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He says precisely that it descends, and then it ascends up to the heart. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Remember? Because I I I was; it descending in, down to the *mūlādhāra*, or I was kind of; *mūlādhāra* just down to the lowest. That is not the; yeah, he's also only *ādhāravaktra* means the lowest uh lowest *cakra*. But here he's not referring; he's talking about descending to the heart, isn't it? Or he, this; no, the heart; I mean, he does not speak [of] the heart. Okay uh. The uh *Vighnābhairava*, he doesn't; he speaks of *matiānādi* only, the in central vein. Okay. But that's why I wanted to take the *Vighnābhairava* to complement it with the meditation of the heart. Okay. It ends in the heart, you're right. Okay. Okay, thank you. Yes. 

Just; Mike, Mike, Mike. 

Could you just explain the verse 49 again, please? So, between the two lotuses, and the two lotuses and what lies between the two lotuses, the space. The space, you mean in the *Vighnābhairava*? In the *Vighnābhairava*. If you could just explain the verse again. Uh, it is empty. I see um. Well, you know it from the Upaniṣads, that *hṛdayākāśa*, the the space uh of the heart which is as vast as the cosmic space, which contains the sun, the moon, the stars, and everything. This is in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad. He doesn't speak of that, but it's that emptiness. It is; emptiness between the two lotuses. And uh so the awareness, or the concentration, undistracted, *ananyacittā*, concentration, should focus on that emptiness. But you can start, as you say, this *bhāvanā*; first you imagine these two lotuses, but then you forget about the two lotuses, and just merge in that space, that emptiness. But the two lotuses are a starting point; are the; a- entrance into that uh empty. So like so many of the practices in *Vighnābhairava* are con- connected with space and with *matyā*. Uh, can you take the mic, somebody? I'll try now. Perfect. Uh, in that *sūtra* from Vi- uh *Viśnābhairava* uh it is focused on space uh as the innermost place. When you then focus on the central channel, the, I can't remember what it is, the *suṣumnā*, the the *brahma*, *brahma nādī*, or what it's called. Is it also space like, or is it uh more energetic? How how to locate the innermost sense there? You mean that *Vighnābhairava*? Now, in this text. In this, yeah. Why the problem is, it's so brief. Mhm. But it is also understood that because uh; it doesn't mean you're not changing the nature of your *matiānādi*. Mhm. But by awareness, it gets; that expansion happens only by awareness. Mhm. And that *matiānādi* is also empty. But this is again, this emptiness; mhm uh that ha- hollow in the *Vighnābhairava*, it's compared with the um the stem of a lotus uh which uh or we can't, yeah, stem of a lotus. So that that hollow uh that's like a hollow pipe, and this, something that can be really experienced. Mhm. Mhm. That expansion means experiencing it uh like a hollow pipe, but he doesn't say this, but it is said in other texts, and it's very clear. So the expansion of the hollow pipe, in your practice, or your understanding of this text; does the expansion happen by itself, or is it something you're playing with? Like, you recognize this innermost hollow space, and you then breathe in with it, or you just recognize that that space is in everything, or how is it? Yeah, I mean, one can describe it in different ways. Mhm. According to the texts also, you uh uh one way of describing is, of course, when he speaks of *bala*, he speaks, on the last two *sūtras*, of that power. So, without that power, this *prāṇa* and *apāna* can- not enter the central *udāna*, this uh. But he doesn't speak of the *prāṇas*; he had spoken of the *prāṇas* before in the context, *āṇavopāya*, that the uh exhalation and inhalation, they enter into *udāna* and the rising breath, and so on. But it is connect- ed, of course. But, without that power, that's why this power has been following us over the last few *sūtras*. Without that power, this is not possible, to enter in that central vein. Because it means, I mean, a- as some of the *yogīs* describe it, [it] means a state of breathlessness. The breaths uh natural breaths, they get abso- rbed there, and you are in a state of breathlessness. When I describe this Shiva, but if you look at his body, you know, this *prāṇa* body, where everything has been centralized, and there is no duality of breathing in, breathing out. It is completely becoming one with that power of breath in the central uh in the center. And that center, which, of course, expan- ds in the whole body. Mhm. Automatically, everything becomes; I mean, really, if you look at this image from the yogic point of view, it will reveal uh that experience. So likely, in the following *sūtras*, he will come to some more practices to reach that. So uh uh I think we should stop here. But now, as I say, this has opened the door to um the more practical aspect of the text and to our own practice. And now I really um we will really listen to the *Devasthadevatācakrastotra* of Abhinavagupta. We <beep>. 
