Prema lakṣyā vinaiva sṛṣṭi mahārjananī Vima lakṣyā vinaiva sṛṣṭi mahārjananī Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha guptaruci janakaḥ Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha guptaruci janakaḥ Tadubhaye yāmala sphuṭabhāva viśargamamyaṃ Tadubhaye yāmala sphuṭabhāva sphuṭabhāva viśargamamyaṃ Hṛdayamadutarāyāṃ amṛtakolam Mama samuspuratām Tadubhaye yāmala sphuṭabhāva viśargamamyaṃ Hṛdayamadutarāyāṃ amṛtakolam Mama samuspuratām 

Any word, any syllable out of his interpretation, otherwise, things can be just taken for granted, you know, or goddess, or Mahā Prabhu, or my Lord, tell me or the divya upacāra in the apparently simple expression he commenced upon with great depths intelligence to that depth of his exercises and of his non-dualistic interpretation. So the same he is doing with the his answer. First one and half verses of his answer. Śrī Devīmahābhāge uttarasya punaḥ punaḥ. And obviously the already stated that the Devī knows and Parvati knows that she knows. So it's a kind of he repeats also the same words which he has already used in that question. Kālikāviti? No, she said Kālikāciti, not Kālikāviti. But um yes Kālikācitī. Dawn sadya. So this he just repeats what Vac here had asked finally was not so much an explanation of these words but something which can give her satisfaction. Yathā pritim labhante. So it's not so much that we are looking in the tantra abitānakauśa and it gives you the definition: what is kālikācitī? What is this that? Uh, but this is not what she wants. She wants something to give her full satisfaction. And that is obviously beyond the language or through the language at another level. And it is of course we are studying the tantra and the in Bhairava also this kind of desire. We don't want to have just the definition of things. We want to experience that the that satisfaction which and in the two ultimate consciousness, which is not different from another. And that is what we of course we are combining with meditation and all these things have to flow together, otherwise, it is isolated uh thing things. But text and practice and all whatever experience we have at any level it should lead us towards that unity which the Devī is aspiring for us to have. 

So he starts his answer:  Śrīnaudīti. Nau Devī of course he has already gone into the details of the meaning of Devī doesn't need to repeat that. But śṛṇu listen. And it's very beautiful how he explains that. Listen! Listen! Yes, now, of course, he he addresses her as Mahābhāga. Mahābhāga means the uh blessed one, or most illustrious one, most famous one, etcetera, etcetera. And then he gives a number of interpretations of Mahābhāga. But of these interpretations, I want to take out only one that is on page sixty-seven in the translation and which is Page twenty-four in the Sanskrit where he quotes Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa. Who was in the stotra Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇī? One, two, or four verses after Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇī said: mama sthūla pratiti Chida sthūlatale. Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇī also? Okay, this Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa, this Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa, he he is is śṛṇagara Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇī of Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa? Yes, yes, yes. So one of the interpretations of uh Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa he translates Mahā ābhāga Mahā. Mahā means jagatā ananta viśati bliss which entirely uninterrupted perfect integral independent expression of divine freedom. Ā means īśat or slight. Bhāga means fraction. So Mahābhāga means the Devī of whose jagatā ananta bliss only a slight fraction is available to us. Whatever happiness there is in life, it is possible only by entering the universal creative energy who is the highest abode of the supreme bliss. It appears in small limited measure in life only because of this ādiśakti not being realized in her internal essential aspect. Okay. Look at this Sanskrit. Yat yat kila sukhaṃ tat mahānanda nirṛti paramadhāmni viśarśaktyo anupraveśāt Tataśca cetyam āna tayā kriyārūpadhām āptām. Why do we have only a small portion of that bliss which the Goddess possesses in fullness? What she is? She is that fullness because we have not fully expanded that in creative energy this ādiśakti. And that way Kā jagatānanda is the highest level of bliss. The universal bliss which is the Devī. And we only get a portion of it. And that is beautiful verse by Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa. I am supposed that that Śivas is recited at home? That is some people do they do recite it. And Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa Kālokyē api abhidhāvya yāvān ānanda kaścid īkṣate Sarvendriyāsyataṃ vande devaṃ ānandasāgaraṃ. I worship, I pray, I pay homage to that God who is the ocean of bliss, ānandasāgara. Of whose ocean of bliss only one drop is given to us. It's such a beautiful verse. Do you imagine that fullness of that bliss? And we we get one drop and we already get intoxicated by that one drop. But what will that ocean do? So all that delight that is noticed in all the three worlds is only a drop of whose delight of of that to that God the ocean. The translation is not very good. I don't have the text here either. I don't have the translation. It's only a drop of the bliss of that God who is an ocean of bliss, ānandasāgara. So it is only a portion, what we experience is only a small portion and the great mystics who who experience another fullness of the they are in a state of samādhi of absorption of that fullness of bliss. 

Now this I want to take out on the on the different interpretations of uh Mahābhāga. And then comes the śṛṇu. Listen. And this is again a very beautiful verse. This is the Devī, on the one hand, she is that fullness of bliss of which we get only a time. On the other hand, she is the one who hears everything. Śrutiḥ śrutiḥ śrutiḥ śrutiḥ Śabdanākyayā śabdayati saṃpūrṇa viśvācya. Abiding as she does in the form of the power of hearing, She has that sovereign power of freedom, svātantrya, which consists in effecting congruous and suitable connection by blending all sound in a meaningful whole. So that is uh where we are behind. Now it is very important in the whole context of language analysis.

But what what makes the unity of, and he gives the example of, suppose you are in a crowd and the people are talking or mix them with sound, make out, you know, not not one sentence which you can hear uh clearly. But the goddess who hears everything, she gives a meaning to all that. This is very. She She makes it possible to grasp. That's why, as they will say, the yogis who are who have developed their their sensibility, or they can hear also at the distance, for example, different uh sense, their sense organs are much more developed and their hearing and uh so she, if it is she, that goddess, who gives the power of hearing and of understanding even a indistinct sound. That's why, I'm sorry, I will say something very personal, but when I was a small child, I was 100% convinced that I could understand the language of the birds. And then when I became, of course, when you get into the school age and the education makes you forget all these things. But still I was very convinced I could understand the language of the bird, and that is a. The Divine gives that even to children, because I have no proof about it, but the conviction was there, that if you listen to the birds and you you have the capacity, you know what they are expressing. So, and this and uh this is a a example of mixed sound. She can bring this sound in the blending all sound in a meaningful whole. The sound which is clear to the ear but is only succession of a massive massive confused vibrating syllables. Without this power of effecting conscious connection and experience through hearing particular words lost in confused passing sound phase in common usage, and we hear them. Not to talk of course of hearing people talking in a language which is not yours, which you don't know, be it would be Chinese uh or any other those many, many languages that we hear. So if somebody has that power, that Divine power, even uh to understand or to get the meaning of a language which you don't know. This is this. The source of it is that Divine power, the Devi, Devi who hears everything. That's Sabda Brahmaśakti is an attribute of the Sabdaśakti. That's why we have also very to be careful what they the kind of noises we make, what the kind of what we speak, what we expressing through our. Ravana also and better about Ravana. Ravana. Yes, Ravana. Now of course in uh and the etymology of Ravana the Ravana place an important part is the sound. An object of sense perception is merely confused passing sound without its being blended in a sensible whole is also certainly here. This is the common usage. But can really be the confused sound only understood? That's not that enable the listener to grasp the real motive of the sound. Therefore, it remains only confused massive sound. For being different from the words, it is merely passing sound. But it is intended to enunciate the words. Then there cannot be the production of confused sound. For there is no form for it. When there is a desire to speak sensibly then there is the enunciation of clear words. And with the enunciation of clear words, there's no occasion for indistinct confused sound at the same time. Those very words, when they are not clearly enunciated also cannot be made into a meaningful whole. Also it would be merely confused sound. For one identically intends by uttering the words in a sensible whole. Then may be clear comprehension to some extent. Therefore, in such a case, it is the conscious connection of the words which can be used. It is the Goddess Vāc śakti who brings about the conscious connection between words and sentences. And the Devi quotes, or the, quotes the Kato Upanishad and the page 25 in Sanskrit. yena rūpaṁ rasaṁ gandhaṁ sparśa śabdāṁś ca maitunam etenaiva vijānāti kiṁ atra pariśiṣyate. That by which one knows color and form, rūpa, taste, smell, contact, sound, pleasure of sexual intercourse. Well, it it self alone that is taken from the Vedas uh verse. What remains in this world? etena vijānāti by which one knows the what remains. This is Paramashiva, the jnana with an pick. So uh when starts of course with an topic was the end of the vida. But it is that has been said by Parameshvara Kathopanishad. What are the quotations from the Upanishads? They give us authority. I made mistake that in print this is not chapter 2, it's chapter 4 of the Kathopanishad. Yes, no, no. It's chapter second chapter, second adhyāya, fourth valli. It's second adhyāya. So second adhyāya, fourth valli? Ah, fourth valli, yeah. Yeah. Yes. They're different counties? Yes. Different either the uh section or the. And till, and of course we had from the very beginning the four levels of our. So it is at the upāṁśu is the level matter prakrti so in a in a very strict, and then of course this is vyākhyā. That, but in this whole better because he wants to express it that whatever hearing is there is our hearing with this participation in the hearing of the Devi. Because she hears everything, and and this is the beauty that all the sense organs, which we always ascribe to our individual, to our mind individual, that it is the Devi who who perceives, who receive all the sense perceptions. It's through the Shakti, through that, that we perceive through our senses of course in the in the analysis this is vyākhyāna, it's Paramashiva's Devi consciousness of the senses, but it is absolutely. But this is about really Devi, and page 70 uh following already told you that I'm not going into this subject of the **three persons**. That is quite easily you can read it in the in one. But and we have already mentioned it in the context of **Mukti**. The Mamakāra of Mukti and uh so that there the second person is in the kind of dynamism to merge with the first person. The third person the second, and the second and the first, and that corresponds to jīva in the sense that matter has to merge with Shakti in order to attain Shiva. And then the personal pronounce, this is to. Uh this relates to third person: he, she, it; second person: you; first person: I. Uh-huh. And then he gives beautiful very clear examples on the following page. Among mountains, I am Meru. Among the mountains, I am Meru, and uh Vishnu is in between Vishnu transforms into the third person mountains, and other things into the first person of his divine consciousness. So this beautiful, but it's very easy to understand, you can read it in the text. 

And this is of course the principle that there is a grammatical logic. It's not un illogical. But at the same time, the principle behind this process of transformation of the third person, second to the first is again sarvaṁ sarvātmakam. And he brings it up at every different contexts that everything is related to everything else. So a third person object, that is totally foreign to me, never remains isolated. Everything becomes, I mean this you can practice it in in daily life, not to consider any entity as an object. Because our objectifying tendency, that makes always a split. This is the object, there is the subject. Unless you have the Shakti, who is in between, who is mediating between the object and the subject. And who helps you to transform this objectivity into subjectivity. Because the whole philosophy is behind, but I'm not going with a philosophical aspect. But um that objectifying tendency is always bound with with **bheda bheda bheda shakti** difference. And our whole aim is to move from **bheda** to **abhedabheda** to **abheda**. And the shakti's **abhedabheda shakti**, but this important. She mediates between both. And then ultimately to this non-dual identity of the object of perception, the perception itself, and the subject who perceives. And this uh I'm just this um using the end of this topic page 74. Again he stops himself from going into too great detail. So enough of elaboration of the topic because can appeal to the hearts of only few people who have received the teaching from the guru, who are refined this for a period and who have been purified by the descent of the supreme grace. This is the qualification for studying this Shiva sutras. And that's why it is never just only erudition, only knowledge. Or no only this would have to be.

And that's the greatness of Abhinavagupta, because he starts with a very anubhava, the very common to start with anubhava. And yet he analyzes everything to the utmost logical conclusion, linguistic analysis, etc. But still the basic equipment is **shaktipāta**, because otherwise to connect it with the beginning you cannot access that level of passion. You will understand it only at the level of mathematics and maybe any holistic vedic version of the. But what we require to understand such a text, and to understanding, misreading karma to make it one with one's heart, is at the level of passion. And for passion you need this. It is not the end of a logical conclusion. It requires **shaktipāta**. But in a, but in a. 

Can you make a distinction between **shaktipāta** and **kṛpā**? Yes. But **kṛpā** is actually not important for me. **Kṛpā** is very general term. But it's important for us, especially if I have not done it before. Uh rather there are three terms, and so vastuh. 

