Premakalāśrayabhinnvasṛṣṭi mahārjananī vimalakalāśrayābhinnvasṛṣṭi mahārjananī bharitatnuśca pañcamukhaguptārucijātakaḥ bharitatnuśca pañcamukhaguptārucijātakaḥ tadubhayāmalasphuratabhāvaviśargayam tadubhayāmalasphuratabhāvaviśargayam hṛdayamanutararāṁ amṛtakolam mamasaṁsphuratāṁ tadubhayāmalasphuratabhāvaviśargayam tadubhayāmalasphuratabhāvaviśargayam hṛdayamanutararāṁ amṛtakolam mamasaṁsphuratāṁ  hṛdayamanutararāṁ amṛtakolam mamasaṁsphuratāṁ   yaścāṁṛtaḥ viśveśvaraḥ śucinyekutrāyāṁ sthitāṁ vadanti devīṁ svātmasaṁvittimekāṁ naraśaktiśivātmakatrikaṁ hṛdaye yā vihitā yā asyā asyā praṇamāmi paramānuttarāṁ nijātmāṁ pratimāṁ cāvatīṁ jayajayāvatīṁ parāśritakulāśritakuñjarāṁ śrīmānādyanātuśaṅkumucitāṁ paramesvaram 

In the last mantra śloka, maybe we have that the text is not only to invite the unawakened disciples but also to remind us all the time again, and this is a very important aspect, that until this can happen, it costs for us to really get into the text. And that takes at least 24 hours even if you have read and we have prepared ourselves. But you just think some kind of a "getting uh spirit" of the text, so we give ourselves today, and from tomorrow, I think we are more, we'll be more uh inside the text, and that uh inspiration will become more easily. Now, but the comparison which came to me also that we recited the entire upaniṣad, except upaniṣad, in about 30 minutes. It is a very important comparison. He actually, he uses the tantra like a launching pad for launching into the space of consciousness. He doesn't use it as a method of yoga. In Bombay, it's very often the case, on the contrary, that it is something like a launching pad that he gets so fired by this question of the baby special, that's why this is Krishna Yaśodā and and then makes him ascend to those, all those dimensions of consciousness which are then finally expressed in the term "teacher is on the part". 

Now we have, in the morning we have spoken about the non-dualism of question and answer or question and answer, and there is a um, of course, a lot of discussion about this in the context of Advaita. And so the discussion is also there in the upaniṣad where upaniṣad says: "Consciousness itself becomes question and answer in the position of master and disciple, the difference in their body is insubstantial". It's very beautiful. And then there is discussion in his commentary.  There's a group of action who says: "Well, it's not the difference between master disciple, but a matter of direct perception. Where is the place for the nature and unity of consciousness?" And then uh, another answers to this objection, this difference is insubstantial; however, for consciousness out of the immensity of its own freedom makes these different bodies to appear within itself. And instead of, "it proper", we have to say "first" because now we know "parā" is the, that is consciousness itself. So, out of the immensity of her own freedom, she makes the difference between master and disciple appear within herself. So, that's why this dualism of guru disciple is already overcome, even philosophically, in consciousness, because the thought of consciousness, there there is no relationship and there's no question, there's no answer, so they have to be included in that total consciousness, who is the parā devi. Now, the uh, we could, if you remember the tune which he had done in Mandukya, we could repeat the first verse, and after we come to recite this again with the second verse first. And we play only the second part, second part, just for, for the preparation for tomorrow. Okay, we need to start with, it is here. Okay, I have a recording, just to be sure of the pronunciation too. 

Take your comfortable position. Close your eyes. Gently close your eyes, and now the first refrain.

> Sa yadāvalīnasiddhaṁ yena vidyātanaṁ kecidsamanāṁsa evaṁ dṛṣṭaṁ mahāvīryaṁ śāśvataṁ sadā śivam tadubhayāmalasphuritabhāvaviśargayam   


So, as I call it, the launching pad for upaniṣad. This first verse, every word, I don't think, simply he goes on explaining in all the possibilities, so it is a, an extreme example of tantric teacher. Jesus, I have not encountered any other sources, examples. Every word in this single verse is taken to its utmost possible explanation and interpretation with, of course, the, the highest level is the 16 interpretations of **anuttara**. But before that, we see he has not "anuttara" hasn't said this, that anuttara occurs in all the three genders. You have "anuttara" is neuter, and before we have "anuttara", feminine, and then "anuttara" as a male is masculine. So here, but all these discussions which you find in Europe, people talking about tantra and the uh gender issues and all these things. The gender is not at all, it may be "anuttara", feminine, "anuttara", or "anuttara". So, it's not a question of the gender, and which shows that it is beyond. It is beyond gender, but he doesn't say that because he assumes uh this understood. And so, they will come and don't worry that we'll not go into every one of those meanings, because otherwise, we will be sitting here for months, only doing "anuttara" or only doing the first verse uh, we have to be selective, of course. But the question is, now, how does he start his commentary? He does not start with the words, but he starts from "anuttara", more the very physical which gives the key to the entire interpretation. 

Now, I have always to tell you where is the Sanskrit and where is the English. The English is on page 8, and the Sanskrit, on page 2. So, those who are the Sanskrit, if all of Sanskrit people from other foreign state, they look at, side by side, or at least they look at the Sanskrit. So, I cannot read anything but just an idea of the beginning of ah his commentary.

> Parameśvaraḥ paracittakṛtyamayaḥ satataṃ anugṛhamayo yathā śaktyā āyuṣaḥ parārthopāyaśaktyā ākānte ākānto astikaram anugṛha eva ātmaivā na hi śaktiśivād bhedamā ātmāśritaḥ

So, he starts from a doctrine which is common to all Śaiva āgamas, that is, that Shiva ah, as five, or rather four, five acts, **pañcakṛtya**. And so this is also part of the entire ah daśa of commentator like Utpaladeva Abhinavagupta to bring, to integrate, the whole of the tantric or āgamic revelation into his non-dualistic philosophy, at the script which he and his disciples Jayaratha, they use every occasion to stress that non-duality. And so, he begins with the statement that the Lord Shiva, Paramashiva, he always plays about his five acts. I think all of you, since this is Shiva Purāṇa, you all know it: *jñāna*, *kriyā*, *tyāga*. And then that's a short verse. Some of the older āgamas have only three: *sṛṣṭi*, *sthiti*, *saṃhāra*, that in the non-dualistic event of the Shaiva Siddhanta, always include five acts, **pañcakṛtya**. But here immediately, and this is so important why he places this at the beginning of his commentary on the Vātūlāgama, because when it's a question of sudden enlightenment, and not of going through all anupaya and all these different means, then it requires grace. So, without grace, that sudden enlightenment can't happen. And that is why he immediately starts stating: the highest Lord ever brings about the fivefold act. He is, in fact, the very grace itself. He always equipped with his supreme divine energy, whose very nature is grace. 

Now, here we know now that "parā" is not an adjective of the shakti, but it is the noun that she is "parā". So, he is always united with "parā", and hence with that. And because it's a shakti, you could even understand subtle psychological undertones. After all, it's a feminine element, which is grace even in the divinity. And even under the what the noun, the uh what he uses is **"ākrānta"**. He is always **ākrānta**, and is always overwhelmed by the presence of parā shakti. He is completely under the influence of "parā". He's overwhelmed by this "parā" shakti who is pure grace. So, forget about the other four acts, it's all about grace. So, because he's completely one with the "parā" who is **anugraha**, that is why his main act is grace, **anugraha**. 

And this statement is so important because, as I said, it's not a question of effort. Not a question of doing all the rituals. Of course, two kinds of effort in this tradition, either a lot of rituals, as you have in the Siddhānta, or a lot of yoga, as you have in the yoga other systems. But it is all based on grace. And that is why even when he says, when Abhinavagupta uses words, "who are qualified for receiving this teaching, or for ah, practicing it", "those who have received the powerful shakti parā". And this is the condition. And this is, and whether one knows it or not. But, one would not be attracted to this kind of teaching, or this kind of revelation, without having already received some degree of grace. We know there are nine degrees of grace. On that we don't need to go into details, from the, the most uh gentle kind of grace which takes you to the seminar, and then to the lecture, and so on, and then you search for enlightenment. This is all, it's also grace. But, and up to the Shiva diksha, which is so powerful that you can't imagine. So, he describes these nine degrees of grace in the Tantrāloka of the Tantrāloka, and in the relevance of the Tantrāsāra. So, to some degree, that grace has to be there. And it is there, it's not a question of "having to be", but it is there. And that's what we said about the recognition, you know, we only have to recognize that it is already. And only this should we know our mental confusion, only that prevents us from realizing this grace. But here, that he begins precisely in the beginning of his commentary is so important, because, although immediately he stresses, it's the non-dualism between Shiva and shakti, but still the "parā" devi, "parā" shakti, she has an influence. So, that means that "parā" element is there. It is not uh not just a, a compact unity where there is no relationship nor uh, no mutual uh, it's not a mutual relationship. This is **ākrānta**. It's very uh important to be stressed here. And then immediately he says: "na hi śaktiśivād bhedamā ātmāśritaḥ". And ah, the shakti should never be considered as separate from Shiva, so that non-dualism is immediately is established. And because shakti or "parā" is grace itself. And the Lord himself. And worshiping. And that is why the most important final act of Shiva is **anugraha**. And the whole purpose of even *sṛṣṭi*, *sthiti*, *saṃhāra*, līlā, the whole purpose is immediately this grace. This gives a completely different perspective to these five acts, because some people get stuck in saṃhāra, they should be in saṃhāra, they should be in tirodhāna, apparently negative acts. But they are only negative in the sense of this commentary. They are only stacked for the sake of it. They have no negative, they are not negative in themselves. So, it is only the one side of the same coin. The other side of the same coin. And ultimately it is all, the ultimate "parā" as **anugraha**. And, and then again it is this shakti, who is full of that, for the entire world is, because it's not for Shiva. This shakti, who is full of the thought of grace for the entire world is to begin with non-different from Paramashiva. And the non-differentiation between Shiva and Shakti, I think it's at least 46 editions in Tantrāloka, never, never what he has added: whose Paramashiva is this whose full of this commentary of the essential nature of the divine, and who has the 100 powers which are bound as an operation which are about to be described? Now, he immediately enters the realm of vāk Shiva while he's writing such a commentary also thus is he has to deal with words, the language. So, the question is: at what level of language do we speak? And there immediately enters uh into the four levels of **vāk**, starting from **parā**. 

Now I, I'm sure that most of you, all of you are familiar with the four levels of **vāk** which are just ah repeating this that the word has four stages: **"parā"**, the supreme in which there is no differentiation. There is neither thought nor language. But it is the source of all that. It's the source of all ah words and thoughts, and thoughts also part of language, because. So **"parā"** is the source. And the important uh, as we see more and more, the second, from the **parā**, is **paśyantī**. And **paśyantī** is most essential. If we understand **paśyantī**, we can understand everything. Because **paśyantī**, literally the "seeing". And seeing means that there is no sequence when we speak or we make music or we listen to music. There's always a temporal sequence. And even to catch a piece of music in a moment that it, it's very difficult. We must have a great intuitive ah capacity to catch something which is stretched in time in, in a moment. So that you have such a wonderful music, and you wish it is compacted into. But it's not possible, still it has a sequence. But at the level of **paśyantī**, the seeing is not temporal, temporal. And the example is always given, standing on top of the mountain and looking into the valley, you see everything simultaneously. Or looking at the painting, you don't see that this is a nose and then there's an eye, there is a hair, there is a shoulder. You see it in one glance. That is why **paśyantī** is *a* temporal before temporary. And this is only in the other sense also that it is intuitive. It is uh inspirational. There is the moment thought enters the consciousness. We have the sequence. The thought is at the beginning of the becoming, becoming. There is sequence mentally. But that is just, only before we express ourselves. And then, **vaikharī** is the most outward expression through the vocal organs and through instruments or anything which produces sound, and produces language itself. So, that's **vaikharī**. But, **madhyamā** is properly called like that because she is lying. I'm always using "she" because **vāk** is the shakti. **Vāk** is uh also energy. So, **madhyamā** is in-between the inspirational, intuitive level of **paśyantī** and the expressed level of **vaikharī**. 

So, it's an intermediate state which, of course, without thought there's no language, etc., etc. But **patiently**, if you try to understand **patiently**, then you have access to understanding the scriptures or being inspired or understanding poetry, understanding music and at a level which is not technical and which is not sequential. There's no counting up, up, up. And that is why he starts here with **paśyantī**. He doesn't give us a list from, from, there are always two, two ways of looking at, either from starting from the top and descending, or from the bottom and ascending because from the top then, **parāvāk** is goddess identified with this **parā**, **parā** divine **paśyantī**. In the descending order, "parā", **paśyantī**, **madhyamā**, **vaikharī**, it is the order of revelation. And in revelation of the **parāvāk** level it descends from the transcendental source and comes down to the level of expression, whether in spoken, written, or any form. And the ascending order is for us who are living with this words and this language, and from this language we have to rise first to the level of thought, and then to the level of **paśyantī**. So, going beyond thought and, and that is the ascending. So, the practice what we do in meditation is to come first to calm the mind, and then when there are many thoughts still in the mind, still to try to go beyond the thoughts to that point where the thoughts come from, and that is the practice which you have in Ghana Mahāśī, or in Vijñāna Bhairava, to go to the source from where it springs, from where the thoughts spring, that is **paśyantī**. Now, "parā" is of course experientially experienced only by the highest Yogis. There was one, I must refer to. Some yogis want to, somebody asked him, a friend of mine, she asked him, "Swamiji, do you sometimes go into "parā"?" Swamiji was silent for a moment, said, "Yes, for a moment, but then I never want to come down." Once you touch that level, you don't want to come down. But **paśyantī** is very much, many Yogis, many Sadhakas must have experienced **paśyantī**, otherwise you all remain at the level of words and thoughts and concepts, and so on. So, I have to make this excursus because I'm not very sure whether everyone is aware of these connections. 

Now, "she" is not different from **paśyantī**. There's always goddess in the presence, creation of human, and who has 100 powers which are bound to, to creation. Now, **paśyantī** is to then try to understand this very difficult things. Don't try it with your mind. You will never understand. But that's why we have to go, meditation and ecstasies, at the mental level, it is not possible. See, unless you can go to that level from where, unless like a, like the source from where you can throw light on all these multiplicity, all this complexity, and so on, then only you can catch it. And it is a very, I would say scientific. I mean, one can make it into psychology, and of course philosophers definitely can prove that language comes from an inspirational world, intuitive level, from where the words, how we express in poetry, from where this aspect of music, it has precisely the source in **paśyantī**. Our attempt is to, to catch hold of that inspirational level of language, from where then all this becomes clear like something. Now 

> She, this parā vāk is in the most initial state stationed in the divine I-consciousness which is the highest mantra and which is not limited by space or time. That is what the Samhitā says. 
> sā eva sakala-pramātṛ-saṃvit prajñāmai tadameva vartamāna-rūpā tas tu paśyanty ṛgbhyaḥ abhicitaṃ tadameva samcita-vedānta-śāstrābhyaḥ tāvat paśyantir ut utaviśeṣaḥ utkṛṣṭa-jñāna-viśāradānaiḥ paraṃ tadameva parama-mataram paramaha mantramayām adeśa-kāla-talitāyāṃ samvitti virājate

This is important. She is rooted in the very first instance, *uttama-mataram*. She is established in consciousness, _saṃvit_, _samvidi_, *virāja-rūpā*, which is beyond space and time. That is the goddess form. Which is not conditioned by space and time. And which is *paramaha mantramayā*. She is *paramaha mantramayā*. Now, *paramaha mantra* is "aham". The supreme mantra which is the power of all mantras. That's why it's called *mantra-vīryaṃ* in this text. In many books, this *mantra-vīryaṃ* is I-consciousness because without I-consciousness, the mantras are, they sort of say, are like autumn clouds, you know, which move in the sky but they produce no rain. So, those mantras are completely powerless unless they are powered by the power of by consciousness and, and this I-consciousness and this I-consciousness is, is, is the soul consciousness. But it is not the individual, of course. See "aham", not in the sense of individuality, and they will come to this word. Subject matter becomes, what is the "aham"? That is of course, as we have said, *māmā ahaṃ*, there in the. It is not this individual "aham", but it is that universal I-consciousness which is pervading every conscious being, in which we partly participate. See, that this is the, the problem of the, of Eastern dialogue that when we speak of "I" in the Western language and Western context, we think of the individual, but that's not the individual, but the universal here comes, alright mentally, but you find "ahambhāva", "aham", "aham". *Paramaha*. So, he uses here mantra, and of course, the whole text is interpretation of mantra, but the fundamental mantra which underlies the three fundamental is "aham", and that will come *in extenso* in the, in the. So, he, at the beginning, he hints at the topics which will be understood like the levels of *vāk*, **paśyantī**, mantra, "aham", Vijñāna Bhairava Tantra. But all in the respective grades. It is not just a philosophical statement, but. Yeah. The most initial state stationed in the divine I-consciousness, which is the highest mantra and which is not limited by space and time. In that state, she abides without any distinction of question and answer which will start in **paśyantī**. So, here starting from "parā", but **paśyantī**, how does the question and answers start in **paśyantī**? Because **paśyantī** is a very subtle linking point between "parā" and the other. There's not thought, but still there is initially, there's not the very initial state where the consciousness already starts unfolding. Otherwise, it could not be even formulated unless it has some initial stage of unfolding the, the absoluteness of the "aham". So, that is why there is like the question which the Devi asks. It comes of course ultimately from "parā", but it is already entering in **paśyantī**. Now, then you have a book, and you have a printed a verse, and then perhaps from Deva, and you cite it, you read it. And of course, then it comes to **vaikharī**. But the original revelation, here we have to do with revelation. Revelation is at the level of **paśyantī**. Not of thought. Revelation is not mental. That would be bringing it to the lowest level. But revelation is **paśyantī**, **paśyantī** coming down from God. If "parā" would ever remain "parā", then we would have no scriptures, we would have no words, we would have uh, there would be any connecting link. **Paśyantī** is the connecting link which uh brings that ultimate consciousness into our, our, our consciousness. And which makes it possible to experience it. So, you can go from, from top, and from below, from all the levels, we can experience it at the level of **paśyantī**, experience the mantra, and whatever revelation or spiritual wisdom text or are given to us. That experience is at the level of **paśyantī**. And that is why it is so crucial, and the entire process of understanding like the inspiration, art, poetry, etc., etc., it is the level of **paśyantī**. 

That is something like that. 

The parāvāk, which is non-dual, it is identical with supreme consciousness, is present in our experience. So, immediately over the secular concepts of the, the I-consciousness, it is that which pervades all conscious beings. 

Sanskrit, some Sanskrit, *sakala pramāṇeṣaṁ samvit advayamayiḥ tata tāmevātmānaṁ śī iś*, even present as the non-dual consciousness which is in all the *pra mātrī*, of subjects experience, subjects of experience. So, all the experience of or subjects, they partake of the, a non-dual consciousness which is a background of the, the *sakala pramāṇeṣaṁ samvit advayamayiḥ*, is very clear, no doubt is left in it. It is pervading all the consciousness. And that is why, the higher you rise with your consciousness, the more the basic you go. That's why Buddha say they have a compassion and the, the, the understanding of other because seeing the, the *paramāṇe mā*. When somebody ask our, my, "How do you know the thoughts of other people, if they care of others?" This is that consciousness, you know, that, that difference of individuality is overcome, that pervasive consciousness. Therefore we can make out of the thoughts that, though uh, the, the *sakalapramātha advayasambhit*, *sabit advaya* now. 

So, to enlarge our individuality of our consciousness to that universality, that is the, but becoming so pervasive that you can feel we can consciously come know the thoughts of others. But definitely conscious to subdue our limitations, our consciousness activities which limit our consciousness, our self-consciousness. 

So, Bījī nārāyaṇa tīrtha yuktā, but he says: just remove that and then ride the ultimate state where you can feel the consciousness in all of us. Therefore I have quoted it in the, partially comprehends in a general, indeterminate way whatever is desired to be known, if it is awakened by due causal conditions. Now, this uh may be called the, yes, what is said about the śruti. It is an assertion of the  *vikalpa*, because *vikalpa* starts in *manobuddhi*. Also of course, as we say, there is a seed, a seed for *vikalpa* even *pratibhāśā*, it was *vikalpa* in *manobuddhi*, mantra. All these stages is, is a kind of, they're not watertight stages, but one is flowing into the other, flowing into the other. From *pratibhāśā*, there is a beginning of the *vikalpa*, but as we have seen from the *śaktipāta śuddha ekāgratā*, a pure thought, not a disturbing thought, *śuddha ekāgratā*. And from there, then the creativity of course will proceed. The parā prakṛti is nondual, is identical with supreme consciousness, is present in all the bodies and pervades nature uniformly in all spaces even at the level of *pratibhāśā*, technically. 

Therefore, partially comprehends in a general indeterminant way whatever is desired to be known if it is awakened by due causal conditions. Just as one who has experienced very vividly the color, like dark blue etcetera in a peak state and whose experience is determined by many impressions, positive and negative, recalls only that particular color which is awakened by the proper causal conditions of the moment. 

Now uh this sentence shows us how even a Buddha, he likes to adduce practical examples uh from psychological or uh sensory experiences also to, to prove his point. So, what he means here that to restrict partially, you have only to create certain conditions or to remove certain disturbing factors. And uh that the manifold impressions and the peak consciousness, there are so many peacocks in this garden. Now, these peahens are dull, so they are not so colorful like the peacocks. So what impression we may, itself, manifold impressions. And that uh determines the, the collection uh uh what exactly one wants to say here. Those are partially comprehends in a general indeterminant way whatever is desired to be, yeah, that's from that *vikalpa*. And *vikalpa* uh, to attain a perception, any perception, even sense perception, it requires certain conditions or certain factors to come down, that passage from *pratibhāśā* into *nirmāṇamaya*. At the time of the emission of determinate knowledge in *pratibhāśā* in which there is no distinction in the word and its referent, there was obviously not really sense of difference between the word and its referent. *Madhyama*, however, shows 

> saiva sakalapramāṇe saṁvidadvayamayiḥ tata tāmevātmānaṁ rūpaṁ tasmāt paśyanti yat yat abhipratiṣṭhitaṁ tat tadīva samutthitaṁ draṣṭṛrūpaṁ tāvat paśyanti ut uttaviśeṣaḥ utīkartavyaḥ yathā vibhāgye mātraṁ vartete nāmadheyāni sarva prathamataraṁ paramahaṁmantramayāṁ adeśakālakalitāyāṁ saṁvit vimṛśati

This is important. She is rooted in the very first instance *prathama tara*. She is established in consciousness, _samvit_, _samvid_, even *nirguṇa*, *nirguṇa*, which is beyond space and time, that is a qualification, which is not conditioned by space and time. And which is *paramahaṁmantramayā*. She is *paramahaṁmantra mayan*. And this *paramahaṁ mantra* is "aham". The supreme mantra which is the power of all mantras. That's why this called *mantra vīrya* in this case. In many books, this *mantravīrya* is I-consciousness, because without I-consciousness, the mantras are, they text only, they are like autumn clouds, you know, which move in the sky by the influence of wind. So, those mantras are completely powerless unless they are powered by the power of the I-consciousness. Now, and this I-consciousness. And this I-consciousness is, is, as, as the soul consciousness. But this is not the individual consciousness. See, "aham", not in the sense of individuality, otherwise how this would uh, subject matter comes, what is the "aham"? And this, of course uh we have seen, *māmā khadyate* in the uh this not is individual "aham". But it is "I", universal I-consciousness which is pervading every conscious being in which they partake, they participate. See that this is a, the problem of the uh this Western dialogue, that when we speak of "I" in the Western language in Western context, we take of individual, but uh what here is not individuals mind, but the universal ego because ultimately they find "aham Brahma", "aham", "aham", *paramahaṁ mantra*. So, he uses here mantra. And of course, the whole text is ultimately of mantra. But the fundamental mantra which underlies the three other mantra is "aham". And that we come, it extends in the universe. So, at the beginning, he hints at the topics which will be expanded, like the levels of *lakṣya*, **paśyanti**, mantra, "ahaṁ", then I shall, etcetera. But for all intents and purposes, it is not just a philosophical statement, but yeah that one should distinguish the stages between divine I-consciousness, which is the highest mantra and which is not limited by space and time. In that state, she abides without any distinction, question and answer, which we start with **paśyanti**. So, here starting from *parā*, but **paśyanti**, how does the question and answer start in **paśyanti**? Because **paśyanti** is a very subtle uh linking point between the "aham" and the mantra. There's not thought, but still, there's initial, otherwise it's a very initial state where the consciousness already starts unfolding. Otherwise, it could not be even formulated unless it has some initial state of unfolding that absoluteness of the "aham". So, that is why there is like the question which the deity asks. It comes, of course, ultimately from the "aham", but it is already entering in **paśyanti**. Now, when you have a book, and you have a printed uh words on the paper, and you study them and read them, of course, then it comes to *vikalpa*. But the original revelation, here we have to, the revelation, revelation is at the level of **paśyanti**. Not of thought. Revelation is not a thought. That would be bringing it to the lowest level. But the vision is **paśyanti**. 

**paśyāntī** coming down from *parā*, if *parā* would ever remain *parā*, then we would have no scriptures, we would have no words, we would have no uh, there would be any connecting link. **paśyāntī** is the connecting link which uh brings that ultimate consciousness into our, our consciousness and which makes it possible to experience it, looking at from, from, from top, and from below, from all level we can experience it at the ultimate question, experience the contrast, and whatever uh revelation for spiritual discipline, text uh are given to us, and that experience is a very crucial. And that is why she is so crucial, and the entire process of understanding, liking uh inspiration, art, poetry, et cetera, it's a glass **paśyāntī**. 

Okay, okay. 

Right. That is, that is the subject. 

The parā vāc, which is non-dual, that is identical with supreme consciousness, is present in our experience. So, immediately above the level of **paśyantī** and **madhyamā**, above the, the uh i-consciousness, is this, that which pervades all consciousness. There is supreme consciousness. *sakala padārtha saṃvit advaitaṃ eva* Now, who is this here? This parā vāc, full of wondrous light of the one self resting within the one self which is all light, continuous pulsating. That pulsating pulsation is i-consciousness whose highest truth is unending continuity, *avicchinnatā*. *avicchinnatā*. This matter will be clearer further in that parā vāc alone, the **paśyāntī** stage in which there is just an incipience of difference, and the **madhyamā** state in which there is an appearance of difference, which consists specifically of *jñāna* and *kriyā* respectively. *Jñāna*, which is the predominant attribute of Sadāśiva, and *kriyā* which is the predominant attribute of īśvara. Now, this is important, what he says here. Because, here of course, the dialogue is between Devī and, and a, a, but in other āgamas, that dialogue is between Sadāśiva and īśvara. And there also some tantras are there say that they are only uh, there is no dualism between Sadāśiva and īśvara. They are ultimately appearing within that consciousness. So, that's why he mentions here, they are the aspects of Śiva at the level of *jñāna* and *kriyā*. 

The wondrous light of i-consciousness, which can clothe itself in the joy of objective existence, of innumerable universes, is fully operative. Now here you see that this ah, this universe, so universal that it includes, not only one universe, but innumerable universes. That is very important, that the modern uh cosmology, there's not only one universe, but that we have found that in the words or even what modern physics says about expanding universe, it is solar family, the higher vision of innumerable universes. And that i-consciousness which is universal and much unimaginably uh immense. 

The joy of objective existence of innumerable universes. Therefore, supreme consciousness, even while appearing as **paśyāntī** and **madhyamā**, et cetera, experiences itself as the supreme consciousness. It is this supreme consciousness that is said to be Devī. Parā śakti is Devī. So what he wants, this whole development of this commentary is leading to *Devī-vācya*. Who is this Devī? She is the parā and she is supreme consciousness. But, that supreme consciousness which is alone, which is the i-consciousness, but which is the absolute, the universal, all-encompassing uh consciousness. And this is Devī. So, Devī is not somebody different from the, from. But she is that all-pervasive consciousness, the parā śakti.

> Aya vacasaṃvedyāt.

And then because uh, same this thing, but whether it's a interpretation of the word *siddhi*. Uh, I think we have not quite com- condensed it to the uh, part of the initial part of the commentary. So, it may be better to stop here so that I can go over further. And uh, but it shows you how he enters into the subject from which complexity and depth of uh analyzing language, consciousness, and, and entering into the very heart of the mantra, the greatest central problem of our traditions. Uh, the universe, or I think better we stop here and uh 

