Premalakaśrayāṁ vinava sṛṣṭi mahārjananīṁ Vimala kaśrayāṁ vinava sṛṣṭi mahārjananīṁ Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha guptaruci jñanakaḥ Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha guptaruci jñanakaḥ Tadubhayāmalāṁ sphitabhāva viśargamaṁ Tadubhayāmalāṁ sphitabhāva sphitabhāva viśargamaṁ Hṛdaya manoratharāmṛta kulaṁ mama samuspūrtāṁ Tadubhayāmalāṁ sphitabhāva viśargamaṁ Hṛdaya manoratharāmṛta kulaṁ mama samuspūrtāṁ Yaśmiṁ sarvaṁ yataḥ sarvaṁ yaḥ sarvaṁ sarvatāścayaḥ Yaśca sarvamayo nityaṁ tasmai sarvātmane namaḥ Yaśmiṁ sarvaṁ yataḥ sarvaṁ yaḥ sarvaṁ sarvatāścayaḥ Yaśca sarvamayo nityaṁ tasmai sarvātmane namaḥ Śreṣṭhentu santu tikṛtyā paścājjana mārge sarvatatva sampūrṇaṁ sarvārṇabhūṣitāṁ yayā cchedita mantri tāṁ tatā suśānti puṣṭheṣu yathā śaktyā samucce pūjye paryā satyā ātmānaṁ janivedayet evam yajñamākhyātam adhikārebhya yambidhi śrīṁ pūjāṁ vidhi saṁjñāṁ maraṇī jāṁ prasajjati ādyāntakitāṁ nijāṁ vitasajjeti mantrataṁ het padmāntarikṛtaṁ tāyi śūnyāṁ nityamṛtyate jāṁ kāvya te kāmaṁ taṁsaṁ śikramavā luyaḥ aspā pratyakṣa nāmeti sarva jñānaṁ naśaṁśayaḥ evam mantrakalābhakti reti tat tṛkāyamanaṁ etadākṛṣakaṁ tasyeti sarva jñānaṁ mahābhyate Tṛṣṭhentu santu tikṛtyā paścājjana mārge sarvatattva sampūrṇaṁ sarvārṇabhūṣitāṁ yayā cchedita mantri tāṁ tatā suśānti puṣṭheṣu yathā śaktyā samucce pūjye paryā satyā ātmānaṁ janivedayet evam yajñamākhyātam adhikārebhya yambidhi śrīṁ pūjāṁ vidhi saṁjñāṁ maraṇī jāṁ prasajjati ādyāntakitāṁ nijāṁ vitasajjeti mantrataṁ het padmāntarikṛtaṁ tāyi śūnyāṁ nityamṛtyate jāṁ kāvya te kāmaṁ taṁsaṁ śikramavā luyaḥ aspā pratyakṣa nāmeti sarva jñānaṁ naśaṁśayaḥ evam mantrakalābhakti reti tat tṛkāyamanaṁ etadākṛṣakaṁ tasyeti sarva jñānaṁ mahābhyate Tṛṣṭhentu santu tikṛtyā paścājjana mārge sarvatattva sampūrṇaṁ sarvārṇabhūṣitāṁ yayā cchedita mantri tāṁ tatā suśānti puṣṭheṣu yathā śaktyā samucce pūjye paryā satyā ātmānaṁ janivedayet evam yajñamākhyātam adhikārebhya yambidhi śrīṁ pūjāṁ vidhi saṁjñāṁ maraṇī jāṁ prasajjati ādyāntakitāṁ nijāṁ vitasajjeti mantrataṁ het padmāntarikṛtaṁ tāyi śūnyāṁ nityamṛtyate jāṁ kāvya te kāmaṁ taṁsaṁ śikramavā luyaḥ aspā pratyakṣa nāmeti sarva jñānaṁ naśaṁśayaḥ evam mantrakalābhakti reti tat tṛkāyamanaṁ etadākṛṣakaṁ tasyeti sarva jñānaṁ mahābhyate Yaśmiṁ sarvaṁ yataḥ sarvaṁ yaḥ sarvaṁ sarvatāścayaḥ Yaśca sarvamayo nityaṁ tasmai sarvātmane namaḥ Yaśmiṁ sarvaṁ yataḥ sarvaṁ yaḥ sarvaṁ sarvatāścayaḥ Yaśca sarvamayo nityaṁ tasmai sarvātmane namaḥ 

We have But it decided before, and perhaps rightly so. And so we don't need to to do again the entire text, but only the last few verses of the chapter to which we are coming now. And that is from verse 31 to 37. 

Śreṣṭhentu Now, Mike, listen. Being is to cut short, to to leave out so much of the text which, of course, in the short time it is impossible. And yet I we should come at least come to the end and not leave it in the middle. But, of course, we are leaving out the whole large section of *mantra* about the elements of language and the elements of the *tattvas* where it's full _sūtra antarā cāryamantaraḥ_. It is demonstrated in the case of languages in the alphabet, particularly in relation to the *tattvas*. But this is such a complex subject that it cannot be done in half a day. And plus, of course, but I leaving out is the revelation of the *mantra*. And for that also, uh the time is required to let you thinking. Also, I must say that even himself says, "And even the *mantra* in this case, the *mantra* which is called *_hṛdayabīja_* the seed of the heart, it is not limited to any particular picture. It is open to all". And this is very surprising because it's a very esoteric *mantra*, but it says clearly that it is accessible. So it is no mistake to reveal it or to teach it, etc. But that would require time. Now, we have the the the chance to to conclude with the _pūjā_ where many of these elements will automatically come in because every _pūjā_ contains certain elements which are the are necessary. And and and to what I been occupied, as you can expect, it to to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And um so we will only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here And here I want to give you the the chapter 35. Now, we have completed Chapter 3 from 53 from 53. Clearly that you know I mean as we did it Chapter 3. Now, my greatest aim is to cut short, to leave out so much of the text which, of course, in this short time it is impossible, and yet we should come at least come to the end and not leave it in the middle. But uh of course we are leaving out the whole large section of *mantra* about the the elements of language and the elements of the *tattvas* where it's full _sūtra antarā cāryamantaraḥ_. It is demonstrated in the case of languages in the alphabet, particularly in relation to the *tattvas*. But this is such a complex subject that it cannot be done in half a day, and plus, of course, what I am leaving out is the revelation of the *mantra*. And for that also, uh the time is required to let you thinking. Also, I must say that even Kaṇṭaka himself says, "And even the *mantra* in this case, the *mantra* which is called *_hṛdayabīja_*, the seed of the heart, it is not limited to any particular picture. It is open to all". And this is very surprising because it's a very esoteric *mantra*, but he says clearly that it is accessible. So it is no mistake to reveal it or to teach it, etc. But that would require time. Now, we have the the chance to to conclude with the _pūjā_ where many of these elements will automatically come in because every _pūjā_ contains certain elements which are um are necessary. And and and what I been occupied, as you can expect it, to to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And um so we will only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here And and what I been occupied, as you can expect it, is to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And um so we will only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here I want to give you a uh What I been occupied is is to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And so we will only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here I want to give you a But I've been occupied is is to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And so we will only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here I want to give you a But I've been occupied is to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And so we will only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here I want to give you a What I've been occupied is is to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And um so we'll only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here What I been occupied is is to give an esoteric interpretation of the elements of ritual. And um so we'll only take up some of those elements and then come to the conclusion. And here but I been occupied since the beginning of _pūjā_ in the *tantra*. But then the question is in what state of awareness this ritual is performed. And uh and there I been occupied to remind you again and again to in what state of awareness it should be done. So in the *tantra loka* it this is my book to the 30 70 Sanskrit text here. Worship worship in Tantrism is considered to be the offering of all things in non-differentiated unity. The state of perfect fullness which is obtained by worship, recitation, meditation, meditation, sacrifice, vows, and other practices, all these things, regardless whatever we are doing, is called absorption *samādhi* by the ancient masters. There But this in this tradition, in relation to worship, recitation, and other practices, whether externally or internally there 

Enunciation of the rights or the rights of trilling have no usefulness for the *sāṃkhya*. It is said in the _triśūla śritrika sūtra_ that is triśikhā extensively, such as the one who does not know the ritual prescription he becomes a knower of sacrifice, so he quotes here triśikhā as a support. Then uh so that the central portion is What should this mean? "Knower of sacrifice?" No. The last version, "he does not know the ritual prescription he becomes a knower of sacrifice". Where do you read? What you just read, the last line at the "Knower of sacrifice". She wants to know what the knower of sacrifice is. Oh, no, but we come to this. This is uh uh It's an object. It comes mm hmm. mm hmm. *Vihāran akṣiṇu. Vihāran akṣiṇu. Vi* He who knows the rules regarding uh sacrifice or regarding rituals. *Vihe vihāra padika vihe vi vihāranam atha rūpaśūraṇam* So actually I wanted to start earlier in the recitation, but it doesn't matter. We mark the text and uh I want to start from Sanskrit verse. Whose is this story? And it will be, of course, we leave out uh some verses, but uh page 92 in Sanskrit verse 23 and in the translation 242. 242 in chapter. Mm hmm. You, of course, I wanted to start this very early. And uh We actually the _triśikhā tantra_ is more ritualistic than the _Vijñanabhairava_. _Vijñanabhairava_ at the end it gives a substitute for the elements of religious practice. Not only ritual substituted by some meditational practice. But here uh the ritual elements are clearly stated. And yet, the same the *tantra* itself also mentions that this is not necessary. You can do it, but it is not necessary. And that is why in the context of _dīkṣā_, but then the recognition that is the *maṇḍala* which is drawn on the ground and then the whole procedure along with this *maṇḍalan*, but uh this even the *tantra* itself says it is not necessary. And that is why this verse or this first line is quoted frequently by the authors to say that the ritual is not necessary. The external, the external is not necessary. And which leads the external ritual back to knowledge. And this verse address the *maṇḍala upēvāṃ yaḥ paścitvēti tantuvatā sa siddhibhāg bhavetkiyaṃ sāyujyam asau vrajet.* This very powerful uh statement by the *tantra*. Even without seeing the *maṇḍala*, which means a very important element in the _dīkṣā_, ritual of _dīkṣa_. Who he who knows in them in. And it's not said here. Who knows the *maṇḍala*? But this is understood. But it is not said here again this perfection, city, and he is the *yogī*, and he is initiated. He's initiated. So that it clearly implies that uh transcending of the external is higher because he who knows, he who knows, he is higher than one who performs externally because he's initiated. He's the *yogī* and he is initiated. But it is supposed to solve our problem today is that we are not living in the world of ritual. This is for people who are living in a world of ritual and who have to constantly also transcend it. Otherwise, they are stuck in all sorts of unintelligible rituals. They might, uh, they're confused, then they see other, uh, there's they constantly conflict with uh their you lose the inner meaning. But we are not living in the world of ritual, most of us, and uh we in our perception. And there are those for those who are living a world of ritual. Mm hmm. The knowledge transcends. Knowledge is higher. And this establishes these those perfection of *siddhi*. This is, of course, not meant in the sense of in particular uh powers. And I've been told that here also he gives two interpretations of *maṇḍala*. *Maṇḍala* as the background. Uh that background which is most uh prevalent in *śrīka* is the *triśūlārdhamaṇḍalam*, which is also given in other uh texts and of course in the *tantra loka*. Which symbolizes the whole the one and the three energies. Three *śaktis*: *parāparā* and other, etcetera. And which has also a yogic implication that the uh you know, the rise, it it stands for the rising of the energy through the *suṣumṇā* and then the unfolding. Uh, I I'm sorry. I'm the library have the drawing, copies of the drawing of the yogic body combined with the uh the *triśūlārdha maṇḍala*, we can give. So the first uh direct meaning of *maṇḍala* means the background in which the deities installed. *Adriṣṭa* means one who has not seen or one who has not joined the association of *yoginīs*, because *yoginī maṇḍala* is also uh performed in the *maṇḍala* or with the help of *maṇḍala*. So, triśikhā probably did not need the details and other explanation of *maṇḍala*, maybe the system of nerves as medium of *prāṇic* currents and the smaller currents. Now, this is in the yogic body that the *maṇḍala* is also in the yogic body in the *nāḍīs* and *chakras*. And uh so, it is important that he does not only transcend the external ritual but even the yogic. So, even one who has not experienced uh his *nāḍīs* and *chakras*, even he can transcend by knowledge. Maybe interpreted, but does not here mean the seeing the diagram of the trident from the system, this is the *triśūlārdha maṇḍala*. So here, a clear, a clear transcendence of ritual by knowledge. And then uh it comes There's a half verse 20 *anyena jñāta mātrēṇa triśakti.* And this comes back to the first question of the *devī*. *Anyena jñāta mātrēṇa.* So that emphasis on knowledge, or you can put in bracket, esoteric knowledge, is there from the beginning in the *tantra* itself. And by this one verse, the trend of the whole. Otherwise, he was only ritual. He could not articulate so much. You are going to give such a detailed and extensive account of it. And what is beautiful in this phrase, *anyena jñāta mātrēṇa jñātaṃ triśaktibhiḥ*, that just by knowing, of course, what is understood is knowing the *tantra*. But it is different. It is not said, it's a typical language of the *tantras*. It's not said. That is, he who has that knowledge, by his knowledge, not he knows, he is known by all the *śaktis*. And this is, he is passive. The *śaktis* will know him. Not that he knows. He's not, *yogī* is not the subject. He's the object of knowledge. And this is very important. This change in the emphasis. He is known by all the *śaktis*. So we know, of course, *śakti pātra* we have already talked about. But there, the *śaktis* have the initiative. So by his knowledge, he is known by the *śaktis*. Uh, this is very beautiful, you know, because we always say that it depends who, who, the *yogī* or the *sādhaka* who is practicing. It's doing, and this knowing, and this thinking, and so on. But here, it is the receiving. He's receiving this knowledge on the *śaktis*. And uh this is very important. 

to understand this one phrase. *Tantra-vihita-dīkṣitas* he is known by all the deities and by all the omniscient powers. By mere knowledge of this *mantra*, he knows what otherwise known by the Vedic knowledge. I know that before the use of the instrumental by all the *śaktis* he knows the instrument. So the *śaktis* So, this is my comment. I don't want to go into this very briefly, but the implication of the instrumentally significant because knowledge which is mystical and transformative is both active *niyatamātma-preman* and passive *niyantṛ*. They this instrumental This obviously to the forefront in my book in my books. This instrumentals also expresses the recognition not of but by the divine entities. And this is often said also or uh commented upon by Yogis themselves that the *śakti* or the *lokini* come to him in a dream. Swamiji also said this, they come in a dream, and this you know, the *divya-dīkṣita*. This is said generally, he is initiated by the deities. The invisible invisible. Can be in a dream or it can be in the experience He is recognition is here. Recognition with being that I recognize the divine. I am recognized. And this is a complete shift in perspective. I am recognized. And the participation of the *jīva* is, of course, knowledge, and as we said in the morning, he has to grind this uh uh spiritual practice in the grindstone and so on and so, so he has to do something. But uh finally, the result is not in his hands. The result is that he is recognized by the divine powers. Who then they do the job? They they do that. And this is very important to make this shift. And the the second passivity of the mystical knowledge is also expressed in the second half of verse 20. *Śakti-nicaya-samāyoga-vaśāt rogah vinaśyati.* So first is you without uh *adṛṣṭa-mantra-jñaḥ* now even without yoga. Even without yoga, he becomes equal to the family of *śaktis*. And the *samāyoga*, we have looked already before in the first two verses because they are full of uh philosophical and spiritual content. Now, very this question of the ritual becomes much more brief. 

*Tadāntar-vartīyat kiñcit śuddhātmā vyavasthitam. Antaḥ-viśuddham acintya-tattva-jñānam aśnute.* What these are verses which touch very much. *Viśva-devatā* close it is. Whatever is established whatever exists is established in that that that. *Tat-hṛdaye* or *mantra* that or all that is reposing in the pure powers. The limited individual *aṇu* attains without delay or immediately the pure knowledge of the divine *īśvara-jñānaṃ aśnute. Acintya-tattva* of the deity. And when he what is established in a very figurative way that is *_hṛdaya-padma_* and *_hṛdaya_* in the universe, all that reposes in the central seminal *mantra* in the pure state, that is in a state of undifferentiated unity. *Aṇu* is one who breathes or one who experiences and others in a limited way. 

Even he after the realization of the *mantra* becomes topmost of *yogis Buddhanugrahat* and obtains by the influence of this *mantra* the divine knowledge, there is no *Iśvara-jñāna-moṣyatvam* And then the next one uh 34 relates to the Guru. Bhagavanji, can I ask something, please? Why you don't say the name of the *mantra*? You're reading but you skip, you don't say Because uh thank you. I am asking that when you were reading Yeah. the *mantra* is mentioned, but you don't say it. Yes, but I think pronounce because I have not received it. Yeah. Because it is revealed in a coded form. So, unless it be do the uncoding of the code, you know then it's not uh good to pronounce it. And then And the coding is so so complex you know, therefore that at least we would need some more time, one more day to solve. So, I mean you can read it, of course. But uh that uncoding is uh very technical. 

Now, the Guru Guru is here what Choṭakā Choṭakā from the root *chud* means the one who impels or inspires or hyphen directs. That *Choṭakārtha śibuk nirṇīyat sarvajña-prabhāvāt sarva-guṇa-nilaya-sัจ-citta-svāyattana śuciḥ śikayed iha triptā.* But the baby was asking *jñāna-tripti-labhyatām* So, how this *tripti*, how this satisfaction comes? That *Choṭakārtha śibuk nirṇīyat* This uh inspiring or impelling Guru He is to be known as Śiva, he is Śiva, is identical with Śiva. But then it should be known that he That he aspires to know that *mantra* is Śiva. He is unknown to others, but he is himself omniscient supreme Lord. He is omnipresent, doubtless, peacefully satisfied by the his own essential nature and *śānti*. He is that omniscient supreme Lord. Supreme Omniscient *tripta*, and he is fully satisfied. *Sva- svāyattana abhāve'pi* by the his own essential nature, *svāyattana*, he is his own of support. The Guru spiritual director who inspires this *mantra* to realize should be understood to be Śiva himself. The Śiva alone who inspires it. He's beyond comprehension of the senses. 

*Sacchidananda eva niṣkriṣṭaḥ śāśvataḥ etad-artha-coḍakāt śa- śaktyā jñeyā jñāta-bhedaḥ* He is the the unknown Knower. Because in Śiva being He He is the unknown Knower. So, that is again that complete shift from from you know opposite from the object to the subject. See the moment he becomes identified or identical with Śiva, he becomes the subject. He is not the object anymore. That's that's very subtle. *Saccha-jñeya jñāta-bhedaḥ* He's the Knower, not the object of knowledge. Because that's why the Guru is just like Śiva. He is as as we have to turn around completely, you know, He is the subject, not the object. *Svāyattana svāyattana-jñāna-rūpam avagamset Tato* Then what it did? *svāṃ jñeyatvam Viśvataḥ jñātatvam* He is, he is beyond comprehension, is *agamyaḥ* for he is the subject and cannot be reduced to object. Yeah, this studies in itself. And he combines two words together, *jñeyatvam* and *jñātatvam*. 

*Evam-yogitva- kleśa-tasya pramāṇa-gāmi- dīkṣayā-arhati-sam- vidhā- tataḥ adya ārabhya prajāyate* Again, an expression of the relativity of external ritual. He removes this *evam-yogitva-kleśa* only because he knows it in reality. Then in the commentary, it has already been said that there is nothing in this world which is simply monistic. Everything is all-inclusive. And here it comes because the the Guru-bīja of course gives him the chance to speak of the *sarva-sattva-karma-bhūmiḥ*, contain that tiny seed, potential. Just as in the seed of the banyan tree lie all the villain parts, sprouts, branches, leaves, and fruits even so this universe lies in the heart of the Supreme. *Viśvaṃ ca viśvātmakam tataś ca yathā vaṭabīje tad-samucchrayanam vaṭavṛkṣam Evam-pāra- jñānam eva Evam-viśvam idam hṛdaya- antar-gataṃ Tat-samucchrayanīya-prabhūṣaṇāt tataḥ adya ārabhya prajāyate.* Tri- *evam-viśvam idam hṛdaya- antar-gataṃ.* In the same way, the whole universe lies in the heart. So it doesn't say *mantra*, it doesn't say anything. He only 

There's lies in the heart. And then they are reminded of the first answer of Tribe of an Mahatma tribe of a universal consciousness. It is established in this space of *netra*. So that heart, of course, it is the most powerful symbol of the heart is the religion is the *mantra*. But heart as the honest understood also in that inclusive uh meaning of that divine heart which contains everything. So one even if one is performing the *yantra*, the whole universe is there even the something more than that. Sure. This is what everything is there, yeah and mind peace is kept in that way. 

Now, but then asked what is the difference between this conception and the _Chandogya Upanishad_ where we the the net practice all the cosmos in that cosmos is contained in the this basic meditation. This is very very different. But this tries to understand that *tantra* the difference that this dynamic then what is the heart, but this inside the heart is entirely dynamic because the whole machinery machinery is the dynamic principle. Where as there Upanishadic meditation is an understanding, you know? Of course, you're meditating on the heart, and the whole cosmos is in the heart, but uh the dynamism comes here. Of course, the dynamism is called *prakṛti*, but *śakti* who is here is transformed called it called it with evo called it ki called it ki and the scripture. So that whole dynamism is implied within within the heart tribe of established through *yajña*, tribe of established with *yoni* omni of established. Even that *yantra* even a *saṃhitā Nirvana dīkṣā* The certain conviction of this of knowledge knowledge, this is in itself undoubted initiation for liberation. 

How do you know the different grades of _dīkṣā_ of in the cosmos and even the _dīkṣā_ is the the uh the highest apart from *ācārya dīkṣā*. But *ācārya dīkṣā* is for a particular function. But *Nirvana dīkṣā* is for the liberation. And he mentions other other initiations too. Now we we we know that we uh uh because of this *yajña* that we call and we come to to 31 31 *asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā svātmānam sthāpaya svātmānam sthāpaya śivākarottu śivākarottu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tat tvam asi tat tvam asi* Once again. *asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā svātmānam sthāpaya svātmānam sthāpaya śivākarottu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā śivākarottu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tat tvam asi tat tvam asi* Non-touristic. Non-touristic. So the different meanings are given here. We are not going into the uh So then we can make photos of these. We can use it for We can make We can make photos. There's a photocopy shop just opposite it. Hm. So he goes into extensive uh commentary of this of verses which we are not going to do here. But but uh it is important is chapter three *ūccayet parayā śaktyā ātmānaṃ sthāpayet ūccayet parayā śaktyā ātmānaṃ sthāpayet* One should perform the worship the supreme devotion. But there's sometimes people think that *tantra* there's no *bhakti*. But it is not that. Of course, it is not *prakṛti*. It's *parā-prakṛti*. And *parā* and this is this term means non-touristic. *Prakṛti* not as normal people here about it in their absence consciousness. But this is non-touristic *prakṛti*. And *ātmānaṃ sthāpayet* and offer the only think what offering is oneself. Offer of this oneself. The same procedure will be followed in the matter of *ātmikārya* which follows this worship and the offering into fire. And here they have been repeating, we will say repeating for the *mantra*. So all under this uh *mantra tūṣṇīṃ sthiti* where it's precisely a question of this non-dualism. Can we do it? But try So *asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā svātmānaṃ sthāpaya śivākarottu svātmānaṃ sthāpaya śivākarottu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tat tvam asi nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tat tvam asi asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā svātmānaṃ sthāpaya asmad-rūpa-saṃsthā svātmānaṃ sthāpaya śivākarottu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tat tvam asi śivākarottu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tat tvam asi* Non-touristic. Non-touristic. He kept it for *sṛṣṭiṃ tu saṃputikṛtya paścāt yajanam ārabhet sarva-tattvaiḥ susampūrṇam sarvābharaṇa-bhūṣitām yacaitad devī maheśāni sapta-viṃśati- anvitām tathā sugandhi-puṣpaiś ca yathā-śaktyā samucayet pūjayet parama-śaktyā ātmānaṃ sthāpayet evam yajanam ākhyātam ātmikārye 'pi aham iti vai* I'm not going into the the ritual details about all in lies here. *saṃputikaraṇa* I think you know that *saṃputikaraṇa* means enclosing a *mantra* from both sides by by by another *mantra*, *mantra* and in between we have this the *netra* the *netra mantra netra mantra* which is used for *saṃputikaraṇa* of of other *mantras*, and by doing this it becomes more powerful. But uh *sṛṣṭiṃ tu saṃputikṛtya paścāt* and closing ritual and closing of *sṛṣṭi* One should start the *yajana* with this worship. One should worship the goddess *maheśānī* who's fully equipped with all the *tattvas*. He already by translating he already put in the commentary because *sarvābharaṇa-bhūṣitām pūjayet sarvābharaṇa-bhūṣitām* She is filled with all *susampūrṇam* completely, and she is adorned with all uh ornaments, decorated with ornaments. She's consecrated with the the 27 *mantras*, and we're not going into this because I could not go into this myself. But but uh it is important this Chapter three *ūccayet parayā śaktyā ātmānaṃ sthāpayet* One should perform the worship the supreme devotion. But there's sometimes people think that *tantra*, there's no *bhakti*. But it is not that. Of course, it is not *prakṛti*. It's *parā-prakṛti*. And *parā*, and this is this term means non-touristic. *Prakṛti* not as normal people hear about it. In their absence consciousness. But this is non-touristic *prakṛti*. And *ātmānaṃ sthāpayet* and offer the only think what offering is, oneself. Offer of this oneself. The same procedure will be followed in the matter of *ātmikārya* which follows this worship and the offering into fire. Now And here they have been repeating, we will say repeating for the *mantra*. So all under this uh *mantra tūṣṇīṃ sthiti* where it's precisely a question of this non-dualism. Can we do it? But try 

So then we can make photos of this. We can use it for We can make We can make photos. There's a photocopy shop just opposite it. Hm. 

So we come to the end of the *tantra*. It's typical for *catur- catur- kṛta-pūjā-vidhi-samyak- smaraṇīyaṃ tu sadbhiḥ* The performance of the ritual perfectly remembering the seed and the teacher Now, the teacher has been used in the very metaphorical sense here of their inner teacher and, of course, applied to the *mantra*. And then the teacher is used here remembering this matter, of course, means a kind of just a uh repetition internal repetition Uh keeping happiness perfection repetition or in this So all these commentaries are very uh rich but a bit just a elaborate. And then comes this very beautiful summary verses on page 259 in the Sanskrit, and the Sanskrit translation sounds very The mentally very much uh because it's a kind of meditation uh just about the inner teacher that that performs the worship in a proper manner that he listens to his guru that is that is happy is gentle obedient So all these commentaries are very uh rich but a bit just a elaborative. And then comes this very beautiful summary verses on page 259, and the Sanskrit translation sounds there remember forty, you know, because it's a kind of meditation or just about, you know, that performs the worship in a proper manner, that he listens to his guru, that is that peace and gentle and obedient Yeah, that's page 259, the translation there. My translations on page 259, and those of you who know Sanskrit please look at the Sanskrit because it's very beautiful. And as I said in the beginning, these verses are, of course, much easier, and uh they can be recited as we have done before already. The same could also be could be recited also My translations on page 259, and those of you know Sanskrit please look at the Sanskrit because it's very beautiful, and as I said in the beginning, these verses are, of course, much easier, and they can be recited as we have done with the before already. The same good also be could be recited also 

That in which the entire universe shines and which shines everywhere that is the one of unique resplendence, which is the supreme God. 

Which is the supreme God for us, and this a very funny uh metaphor which Kashmiri Shaivism Dharma which even if reminiscent source that just as a jewel or mirror simultaneously expanding and contracting or generally spoken the choices in her heart. In the same way one should meditate on the heart of the nature of creation, which is in the *iti sarvatvaṃ na samaśreyaḥ yoga etats te iti atiśayena atisayena atisayena vadatā ātmā tatra aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ* this very small particle of promise of fulfillment of desires and so on. Therefore, omniscience becomes a direct luminous perception *yat yac chatām iti sarvājñatvam* Now, what is *sarvājñatvam*? Uh means exactly the not discriminations, the word in the Buddhist Buddhism constantly *iti atiśayena vadatā ātmā aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ* this very small particle of promise fulfillment of desires and so on. Therefore, omniscience becomes a direct luminous perception *yat yac chatām iti sarvājñatvam* Now, what is *sarvājñatvam*? Uh means exactly the not discriminations, the word in the Buddhist Buddhism constantly *iti atiśayena vadatā ātmā aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ* this very small particle of promise fulfillment of desires and so on. Therefore, omniscience becomes a direct luminous perception *yat yac chatām iti sarvājñatvam* Now, what is *sarvājñatvam*? Uh means exactly the not discriminations, the word in the Buddhist Buddhism constantly *iti atiśayena vadatā ātmā aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ* this very small particle of promise fulfillment of desires and so on. Therefore, omniscience becomes a direct luminous perception *yat yac chatām iti sarvājñatvam* Now, what is *sarvājñatvam*? Uh means exactly the not discriminations, the word in the Buddhist Buddhism constantly *iti atiśayena vadatā ātmā aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ aṃ* this very small particle of promise fulfillment of desires and so on. Therefore, omniscience becomes a direct luminous perception *yat yac chatām iti sarvājñatvam* Now, what is *sarvājñatvam*? Uh means exactly the not discriminations, the word in the Buddhist Buddhism constantly in China text text and truly this becomes full of endeavor endeavor *ceto dhāraṇas ceto dhāraṇas* through fullness of will brought about by the potency of the various *mantra-sādhana-sādhana-sādhana-śāstra-sādhana-śāstra-śāstra* And so by the repetition of the continuous state of the yoga, he acquires so much power that he obtains immediately whatever he desires. In short, in this very physical body, he acquires omniscience that is characteristic of the Supreme Power. This identification that he becomes which only makes possible. 

And then the end of the commentary After examining from all points of view, the book is now being concluded. In the end, the progress of the *yogī* terminates in the attainment of his transcendental state *akula-sattā akula-sattā akula-sattā* or *asamprajñata asamprajñata*, which means resting in one's essential self. This alone is the state of liberation. Now, this is the concluding part *viśrānti-rūpa akula-sattā asamprajñata*. This is the state which the *yogī* acquires *viśrānti-rūpa akula-sattā asamprajñata*. The attainment of the absolute or transcendental state of the nature of the *puruṣa*. So there *viśrānti* is always a kind of final final bliss of the *puruṣa*. And now he concludes that *mantra-tantra-prayoga-tantra prayoga-tantra prayoga-tantra etad apy āsaṃsiddhi-sāvadyatvam āvadyatvam āvadyatvam* Such is the gain from the practice of this *mantra*. This betokens the union of *mantra* and *mantra*, that is of *śiva* and *śakti*. By the continuous practice of this is acquired the supernatural power of omniscience. Now, it's very clear that we have said from the beginning that this *etad apy āsaṃsiddhi-sāvadyatvam āvadyatvam āvadyatvam etad apy āsaṃsiddhi-sāvadyatvam āvadyatvam āvadyatvam* it does not refer to the text but to the union of *śiva* and *śakti*. And that union which has to occur in the *yogī* Just be realized by him. In conclusion, we said that this connotes the union of *mantra* and *mantra*, that is of *śiva* and *śakti*, where there is no division of question and answer, which is the state of awareness of the essential self, *svarūpa* consciousness. And then uh the Buddha concludes, and this you can read very easily because it's not difficult. 

So with this autobiographical verses uh uh a very lively uh way he describes his family and his disciples and so his uh So I I brought the the concluding session Quite a long text, very tiny And repetition 


