> Prema lakṣayā vinava sṛṣṭi mahājananī vimalā śayā vinava sṛṣṭi mahājananī Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha goptaruci janakah Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha goptaruci janakah Tadukha yayā mala sphuṭabhāva visargamayan Tadukha yayā mala sphuṭabhāva sphuṭabhāva visargamayan Hṛdayamanuttarāyāmr̥takulam Mamasaṃsphuratā tadukha yayā mala sphuṭabhāva visargamayan Hṛdayamanuttarāyāmr̥takulam Mamasaṃsphuratā 

Vista te se amdale ya samandahar as the presentation of the ganta we do it again at 11:00 to 12:00 so that it becomes really paka and then we go to another some uh uh fools issues going to teach us 

> Yasyā mattaha viśvamedhatvidyāvatī bāhyabhāsāsamhāsamānaṃ viśiṣṭaṃ śobhekṣiṇe nutarāyā sthitautaṃ vande devī svātmasaṃprītimekām Naraśaṃśitāvāṃtakamtṛkaṃ hṛdaye yāvyavyāpasye kaṇamāmi paramānuttarām Nijabhāsāṃ pratibhācamatṛtīm 

> Caitanyakramaṃ vimalā vipaścitapūrvajaha śrī mātr̥yaguruśaṃbu śrīkaṇṭha parameśvara 

I know it requires a lot of patience to uh enter this text and to slowly uh get into the center concepts and experiences, but I'm sure you have the patience. And today, we have to progress a bit more fast, otherwise it will happen what happened the very first time we had a seminar on Abhinavagupta: 250 teaching for 15 days every second day 2 or 3 hours, and we never went beyond the explanation of *anuttara*. But this will not happen this we will go as far as we can. But begin to explain you the logic of Abhinavagupta's uh hermeneutics or interpretation. We are still in the explanation of the very simple uh introduction: Devi uvacā. We have not gone beyond Devi uvacā. And because Abhinavagupta does not leave a single occasion to lead everything back to non-dual non-dualism, it could be very simple to to interpret what is, but what is, but this what is the know, but he goes into the depths of that: Devi uvacā. Who is Devi? What does it mean *uvacā*? And uh the whole question of revelation he takes up from the very beginning. And the whole question of what is the purpose of this uh fivefold act, which is all about *anuttara*, and what is the very meaning of Devi, but Devi because she is *parā*, and then he immediately starts from the *parā* and also *parāparā*. And then he starts from the descent from *parā* back to *paśyantī*. And as you have seen yesterday, *paśyantī* is a very crucial uh phase in that flow down from *parā* to the revealed spoken word - the word of a sound world, etcetera. So that is why in the first section he elaborates on the word and on the phases and the whole system, phases of language and phases of consciousness are identical or co-existent. And you cannot analyze the one without the other. So we have yesterday we have gone through this very first part with up to the very hints that it's very very important uh concepts like uh *parāpaśyantī madhyamā* etcetera and the  *prasambhit* that Devi, she is nothing but the supreme consciousness *parā* also. Now uh I will skip certain things, but I will tell you why and uh what we are skipping. Now he comes to the analysis of the word *Devi* as such in the book it is page 1112. And this we can skip because here he goes into the etymology of *Devi* and the uh root meanings of uh *Devi* in over all these. So this is not so important as the metaphysical and mystical uh descent of the Devi from *parā* to *paśyantī* and so on. So we are skipping this explanation of *Devi*, but then he comes to *uvacā*. *Uvacā* - she spoke, and that is here he encounters two problems from his advaitic point of view. One is: why does he past tense? How can there be any past in relation to absolute consciousness? She's a consciousness! So there can be no past tense. And the other is the third person: the Devi spoke - Devi is the third person. So how to overcome these two uh incongruences? And uh then he has of course his method is always the same with the help of grammar he can uh explain away those difficulties. And here uh the thing 

Now let us see first the text of page 11 12. 

> When the glorious *parāparā* became *paśyantī* and *madhyamā* thus recollects herself - "I myself as *parā*, Devi said thus". Then, in that state of recollection shining forth in that form she regards her own *parā* state as past in accordance with the fact of difference brought about by *māyā*, because in comparison to herself that state of *paśyantī* is the commencement of *māyā*. And because of the traveling through the phases of inner senses and outer senses in the development of speech whose life consists in manifesting difference she regards the *parā* state as past. 

So this is uh when looking at the four stages of *vāk* there is a certain temporal sequence. As we said yesterday, at the level of *parā* there is no temporality at all, and at the level of *paśyantī* there is just a slight uh seed for temporality, because otherwise she could not manifest it, she could not descend. And that temporality is when she speaks either at the level of *madhyamā* or *vaikharī*, then the *parā* state is past because it is from there that she has descended, and that is why the justification of *uvacā* as past tense. Not in the sense of any mythological past, you know: once upon a time there was a Devi and then she spoke, and so on - not at all! But in the sense of the origin of that revelation which the origin itself becomes, so to say, past. And then he comes to the question of time - the relativity of time. Where the whole again and again uh he has a chance to to relativize time and he takes hold of that occasion. Like uh one one sentences is *antaḥmukha saṃvidātmanekakālaḥ* - in the internal interiorized consciousness what is time? There is no time! *antaḥmukha saṃvidātmanekakālaḥ* - he concludes. And then again he relative because its time because time is so relative. See the human day, the day of Brahma, the day of God, and they have all different uh temporal units, but the day of Brahma is not limited by the human day whose division of day depends on the apparent motion of the sun. The measure of his today is determined by many *kalpas*. The day of Vishnu and others is even longer than that, and in the case of *yogis* the term day is used even for 1/1000 part of the human day on account of his inward motion of time. So the yogic sense of time is completely different from the human time which we measure with the sun and the moon and so on. So that 1/1000 part of the human day on account of this inward motion of time. But then how can the concept today or the present, which is unsettled and fictitious apply to unfictitious consciousness? According to this principle, *Parābhaṭṭa*, who fulfills the sense of the past in all its aspects which is relating to grammar, I the same *Parābhaṭṭa*-devī, unseparated from Śiva and the *śāstra*, or from the word and its referent, thus said: This is this uh sense of the use of the past tense. And uh now comes the question of the third person. Really, see the third person. But how can the Supreme Consciousness be called the third person? And in the in the next section he will go into the question of the three persons um where the third person means objectivity. And that third person has to merge into the second person and then merge into the first person so that this division, the difference uh between multiplicity is there at the level of the third person. And then it comes merges into the second person, and the second person is that which unites it with the first, because second person is only relationship: thou, you. It is not standing separately. You cannot have a you without an I, it has to be a relationship anyhow. We will come to that. But now the question of the Devi speaking as a third person, and there's a wonderful article by Abhinavagupta on *Devīvāca*. Only on this base where he says on the basis of grammar, *uvāca* can be both the third person and first person. So he brings it to the first person. And uh the fundamental uh implications Abhinavagupta does not say explicitly, but he seems to expect the recipient of his teaching to realize by himself that all this argument is essentially only a variation on the theme of *recognition*. Means the argument that the third person is actually the first person is "I," for Abhinavagupta, the same Abhinavagupta as *Yamaṁ daha* first the presaging of the *Aṇubhāva* with Devi again at the level of *Anuttara*, so it comes really Bhagavat and then we go to another some uh very beautiful verses which is quite picturesque. 

> Yasya jñāna-muditāṁ viśva-mītaṁ vibhāti bhāgya-bhāṣaṁ mukhasammānam vitriṣṭam śobhekṣaṇe nutarāṁ sthitāvāṁ vande devīṁ svātma-saṁvittim ekāṁ naraśaṁ niśi-vākyāṁ trikaṁ trayī-vācya-bhāsya-sye prāṇāṁ niparāṁ nutarāṁ nija-bhāsa- pratibhā-jamāṁ dyutim caratyaṁ paramāṁ vibhāṣitāṁ nipāśita-śobhajaṁ śrīmān abhyāṁ guruśaṁbhum śrī-guṁḍhā- parameśvaraṁ 

So we have yesterday we had gone to this very first part in the Catholic where he hints that it's very very important uh concepts that uh *parārtha-saṁbandhena mukter api* and the Abhinavagupta, that Devi she is nothing but the supreme consciousness herself. Now I'm I will skip certain things, but I will tell you why and uh what we are skipping. Now, he comes to the analysis of the word Devi as such in the book at this page, page 11. And this we can skip because here he goes into the etymology of Devi and the different uh root meanings of uh Devi on the different levels of consciousness. So this is not so important as the metaphysical and mystical uh descent of the Devi from *Parā* to *Paśyantī* and from. So we are skipping this explanation of Devi. But then he comes to *uvāca*. *Uvacā* - she spoke, and that is here he encounters two problems from his Advaitic point of view. One is: why does it the past tense? How can there be any past in relation to absolute consciousness? She's ever present! So there can be no past tense. And the other is the third person: the Devi spoke - Devi is the third person. So how to overcome these two uh inconveniences? And then he, he has, of course, his method is always the Yāga and this, with the help of grammar. He can uh explain away those difficulties. And here, Abhinavagupta... Now, let us see first with the text on page 11, 12. 

> When the glorious *Parābhā*, becoming *Paśyantī* and *Madhyamā*, thus recollects herself, "I myself as *Parābhā* Devi said thus," Then, in that state of recollection, shining forth in verse 4, she regards her own past state as past in accordance with the fact of difference brought about by Māyā because in comparison to herself, that state of *Paśyantī* is the commencement of Māyā. And because of her traveling through the passage of inner senses and outer senses in the development of speech whose life consists in manifesting difference, she regards the *Parā* 

stages passed. So this is uh When looking at the four stages of *paravak* there is a certain temporality sequence, as you see this, that they at the at the level of *para* there is no temporality at all. And at the level of *pashyanti* there is just slight uh see for temporality because otherwise she could not manifest it, she could not descend. And that temporality is when she speaks either at the level of *madhyama* or *vaikhari*. Then the *parastage* is passed because is from there that she has descended. And that is why the justification of *uvacha* as past tense. Not in the sense any mythological past, you know: once upon a time there was a Devi and then she spoke and so on - not at all, but in the sense of the origin of that revelation which the origin itself becomes, so to say, the past. And then he comes to the question of time, the relativity of time. When the whole again and again uh he has a chance to to relativize time that he takes hold of that occasion. Like the one one sentence he says is *antar mukhe samvidatmane kalakal* - in the internal interiorized consciousness what is time? There is no time! *antar mukhe samvidatmane kalakala*. And here again, he relativizes time because time is so relative. See the human day, the day of Brahma, the day of Gods, and they were different uh temporal uh units. The today of Brahma is not limited by the human day whose division of day depends on the apparent motion of the sun. The measure of his today is determined by many *kalpas*. The day of Vishnu and others is even longer than that. And in the case of *yogis*, the the term day is used even for one thousandth part of the human day on account of his inward motion of time. So the yogic sense of time is completely different from the human time which we measure with the sun and the moon and so on. So that one thousandth part of the human day on account of this inward motion of time. Thus how can the concept today or the present, which is unsettled and fictitious, apply to unfictitious consciousness? According to this principle *parabhak*, who fulfils the sense of the past in all its aspects in this relating to grammar I, the same *parabhak* Devi, unseparated from Shiva and the *shastra*, or from the word and its referent, as said: This is the the sense of the use of the past tense. And uh now comes the question of the third person. We use say the third person. But how can the Supreme Consciousness be called a third person? And then the in the next section he will go into the question of the three persons. Um where the third person means objectivity. And that third person has to merge into the second person and then merge into the first person. So that the this division, the difference uh between the multiplicity is there at the level of the third person. And then it comes merges in the second person. When the second person is that which unites it with the first because the second person is only relationship - thou, you. It is not standing separately. We cannot have a you without an I, it has to be a relationship. Anyhow we will come to that. But now the question of the Devi speaking as a third person. And there is a wonderful article by Abhinavagupta on *Devi uvacha*. Only on this base where he says: on the basis of grammar, *uvacha* can be both the third person and first person. So he brings it to the first person. And uh the grammatical uh indications Abhinavagupta does not say explicitly, but he seems to expect the recipient of his teaching to realize by himself that all this argument is essentially only a variation on the theme of *recognition*. Means the argument that the third person is actually the first person means "I Goddess said" -  "I Goddess," not "the Goddess said" as some other. And this is a very great insight that this is not just grammatical uh question, but it is related to the non-duality, of course, of the Devi with the subject, the first person, but the *recognition*, because this can only happen in an act of *recognition*. And that is near. This is what that you don't know, say what this is - the Lord, this is Shiva, and so on. But the *recognition* means your own. You recognize your own Self here. So this is a variation on the theme of *recognition* evoked through the solution of a grammatical problem. This is a very typical method of Abhinavagupta and of the Kashmir Shaivism generally, or Tantra, or Sanskrit authors in generally. Just as the first person would perfectly suffice to speak of the splitting of the subject, a new integration and reconstitution of the original unity. So the Goddess starts from the state of *pashyanti madhyama* and finally she reforms herself as the all-encompassing *paravak*, or in other words as the questioner Devi, and ends as the answered *paravak*. So that she is both! She is the questioner and the answered, both. And then the result of this is not even grammatical analysis - I, who am the Goddess, said. So what a tremendous shift! You are not removing anything in a remote mythological past, but it is your own consciousness which speaks, which asks the question: I, who am the Goddess, said. And here this is the the words of the editor: Abhinavagupta moves with elegance and subtleness between two factually different dimensions nourishing one through the other. Thus pointing to the liberty of his exegesis, to the unpredictability of the paths of Supreme Consciousness. This is unpredictable uh of the paths of Supreme Consciousness. If she appears in the third person, but ultimately it is led back to the first person. And then about the the dynamics of the *recognition* of one's own identity with the Lord. But Abhinavagupta: the perfect tense in the first person is therefore the ideal model to express a distinction and the coincidence of planes at the same time. That is, the empirical subjects existing and acting in ordinary reality and at the same time is being eternally rooted in Supreme Consciousness. This is a very important sentence because we are... See one thing which this text can do with us to make us more aware of how we use language and what are the implications. See even using the personal pronouns. But is we find being eternally rooted in Supreme Consciousness that using *aham*, "I," and then that *recognition* has to be there. So this is the uh the topic of the *Devi uvacha*. And uh then we have, of course, to proceed and finally come to the interpretation of the verse itself, but this not yet, we are not yet there. We are on page 13 in the text. So there uh we have already yesterday the overcoming of the duality of Guru and disciple. And this is what he achieves here in the case of Devi, page 13, and this page four in the Sanskrit. Now yesterday uh before, maybe yesterday, He said something about this "I" consciousness. And it's very important that we Kashmir Shaivism, it is distinguished the *kritrima* and *akritrima aham*. 

The the true Ātma-consciousness is non-artificial activity. And this is very important for psychologists, for example, because the criteria of honesty, artificial I-consciousness, that we identify ourselves with our mind, our body, our daughter, our history, and so on. So this is the dream, but then it is here the question of the consciousness capability, it is absolutely non-artificial. Now, how to distinguish? This is another uh big question of course. Now on page fourteen fifteen, I'll just select its uh still a question about the dialogue with his consort. And He again comes back on page fourteen to the what he has started in the very beginning, that this energy, the *śakti*, *śakti* is the energy of grace and compassion. Thus the power of grace of the divine is always in all experience uninterrupted, therefore she alone, the life and soul of Trika *śāstra*, constitutes the highest relationship. Now, this is in relation to... First of all, I told you that in every *śāstra*, every traditional treaties, there are four constituents of the Brahman: this *sambandham*. *Sambandham* is relation, mainstay, and the other *śāstras* it means the connection between the different elements. But here, Abhinavagupta interprets every one of these in different ways. Here *sambandham* interprets in the sense of grace. And there are different levels of relationship, of course, Shiva from the divine down to the, you know, passing through the different levels of uh revelation. So every time, the *guru* is one step higher than the *śiṣya*, one step lower. And then it comes to the human relationship. But here, it is of course *para-sambandham*. And the revelation is, in any case, an act of grace. And that is why the *devi*, she goes one step down, so to say, from her highest uh level to make this revelation possible and to act as it is said out of compassion, out of grace and compassion. 

In the matter, now it comes of course *anuttara*. 

I come as the very first. Sorry. So, we are still in the uh context of *sambandham* uh this quotation from... This is the interpretation from this particular idea: the highest Lord is always intent on creative activity - this *visarga parama*. Now this *visarga* is also applied as the, by us, for the divine. He showers grace, manifests and withdraws without in any restrict. Thus there is always the active presence of *anuttara*. So the inner content, this question and answer which appears in the consciousness of the highest Lord in an undifferentiated way because of his being the highest truth, is thought of in the *Praśian* state in an indeterminate form - *nirvikalpa*. With the desire to put it in the pronouncements of letter, word and sentence, it is posited with the sense of separateness in the *Madhyama* state in a determinate form - *savikalpa*. It is finally expressed in the form of question and answer in the *Vaikhari* speech, that is in gross speech consisting of letters, words, sentence, such as *anuttaram katham*. So, this explaining how this language comes about and how it has to be expressed in language which comes down up to *Vaikhari*. And uh this is the *anuttara* verse. Now I have made a different translation... Yeah. Yeah, I just take my book on page fifty. This is the imperceptible phase if you want to consult, it is each... Now page five there are these verses... Look here. If I may quote here at the bottom, there are some verses. 

> This is the imperceptible phase of *Para*, full of the field of manifestation. The essence of which is the unsurpassable I-consciousness, full of the stirring joy issuing from the unions and *katha-rasika* who symbolized by *ha*, and *śakti* who is symbolized by *ā*, which is the source of the appearance of the extension of manifestation according to the Trika system of philosophy and ever the abiding state and the life of all living beings. Therefore it is not proper to associate divine the divine with a particular station, etcetera, for in the absence of any limitation in this case designating a particular place for him is entirely unjustified. 

This is very important because he again and again comes down to the level that he don't place *Anuttara*, because we will come to the sixteen limbs of *Anuttara*. It's such a high level that it is totally out of the reach of our human experience. But it is not to be separated from from the same... Yeah. Yeah. 

So in the book, page fifty. And then he comes, the kind of summary of the entire text means the entire Tantrā in the three steps. 

> The fact of question and answer is an ever-present reality which is in the first instance at the level of *Paravāk* without division. The self who is the natural state of existence is self-luminous, amusing himself with question answer which is not different from himself, and in which both the questioner is Shiva and the answerer is Śaiva are only himself. He reflects thus, as "I I myself being thus desirous of wonderful delight, knowing the truth as it is that appears this question and answer." 

So the book begins with this Tantrā begins with the *devi*'s statement *Paravācā*, "how the unsurpassable *anuttara-katham*". It says in the middle *Bhairava-Paravācā*, "Śrī Devī listen..." Look at this, and ends with *iti-Vātūlāgamaḥ*. This constitutes *Vātūlāgama Bhairava śakti*. So it kind of makes an arch, you know: on the beginning the question, then *Bhairava*'s answer, and in the end the union of the two as uh the that which has to happen in the *yogī* who practices this, that the duality of question and answer has to come into uh union. And that's why *Vātūlāgama*, here also, is very clear that Abhinavagupta takes it not in the sense of a text, but in the sense of union of *Bhairava*. 

Now this is the teacher... Last me about this the meaning of enlightenment, and you... Well, I wanted to know more particularly how this question of sudden enlightenment... Yes, but because the text itself on uh translation page eighteen, another aspect which Abhinavagupta fulfills by writing what is the purpose. And the purpose is here stated, page eighteen in the translation, and... Yeah page six uh the last lines in the Sanskrit, because it's very difficult so... *Prayojana* - the purpose, the aim of the entire enterprise. 

> The aim or purpose of the *śāstra* is liberation of all experience in life that divine. Nothing less experience we have become entitled for this knowledge of the unsurpassable *anuttara* derived from grace in the form of the excellent descent of divine *śakti* - *śāktipāt*. This liberation from its penetration with complete identity in the essential nature of *Bhairava* and unification with perfect I-consciousness, which is a delightful flash of one's own essential self and is the achievement of one who by the realization of his essential nature regards the entire multitude of the categories of existence supposed to be bondage as merely different aspects of his sportfulness, which is the expression of the abundance of his delight.

That's a very long sentence that I think the Sanskrit is maybe clearer than the English sometimes. I I need the text, too. *Prayojana* *Prayojanam* just says the *anuttaram anuttarajñāna-bhājanabhāvanā bhāvanā* ittham *nija-svarūpa-hṛdayāṅgīkārāt* ittham *āmūdha para-krīḍā-bhāṣita bhedasya nikhila-bandha-abhimata-tattva-bhātasya svātma-camatkāra-pūrṇamatvā tadātmya-bhairava-svarūpāpedāṁ samāveśa-pratipādyate 'tra mokṣaḥ*. It is such a beautiful sentence, but if we put spend the rest of the day only with this sentence to know what is happening here, this is creative. One aspect: *nija-svarūpa-hṛdayāṅgīkārāt* - this *hṛdayāṅgīkārāt*, this making it absorbing it in the heart that you... What we would translate by "understand," to understand it, but here it's much deeper - absorbing it in the heart and making it a part, absorbing it completely in the heart: *nija-svarūpa* - your own very essential truth, absorbing it in the heart by an absorption in in. And that that the playfulness, there is a sense of playfulness in this. The *jīvanmukti* is not something here... This series of talks is really a book on play. But it's totally playful, because playfulness means freedom. It's an expression of freedom. And but it's so important also that it does not exclude the multiplicity of the *tattvas* also, the all the levels of reality. From the earth to *Śiva*'s mostly abbreviated in this way - from *pṛthivī* to *śiva*, all the 36 *tattvas*. So nothing is excluded in that *recognition* of the relationship to the whole, the sense of nature which is uh in an unfallen way which has been absorbed in the heart. And the that which normally people say, "Oh, this is a destruction! This is a" uh but every aspect of reality, every *tattva*, is pervaded by the same, by the same *svarūpa* of *bheda samaveśa*. So this is absorption in in in the non-duality with the essential nature of *brahman*. This is *jīvanmukti*. But then, all-inclusive, not excluding any level of reality. And that is what we will see then when we come to the definition of *anuttara*, where it is not an abstract absolute somewhere else, but it is present in all the levels of reality. 

That much of that will now understand. Yes. We are speaking of the *ahaṃtā*. Especially *ahaṃ*. And which is the fullness of our consciousness to the *ahaṃtā*, which is a state of wonder. It is surprising one is struck by that fullness. *Svatma-camatkāra pūrṇa-ahaṃ pūrṇa-ahaṃtā.* That that mean being one completely completely one with the fullness of our consciousness. Which is the the the wonder which is a the surprise: *svatma-camatkāra* uh because when Shiva Shiva sutras says, "Ismaya yoga-kukkuṭaka - state of surprise for all." So that is why this *camatkāra* and because *ismaya* can be translated by amazement, both in the aesthetic context and in the mystical context. They sign for an authentic experience. Whether it's of aesthetic or spiritual is a sense of wonder. It can never be something which... Routine. Because I have already heard. Oh, that's okay, it's okay. So if there's no sense of surprise and wonder for something, something new, something fresh, then it is not authentic. And that is why, our checking our own temperature, spiritual temperature, you know, whether we are really full with this or this, whether it can have the sense of wonder. And if we want to know how it looks, then look at children. See a child looking or experiencing something for the first one, is so beautiful. And we are so much already attached with our the routine of it being always the same, thinking the same thoughts and... No. So there's no sense of surprise. And so this is that definition here. You have a definition of *ananda* in in this tradition. It translated it... It is the delightful flash of one's own essential self. And there is considering all the levels of the *tattvas* from the earth to... But that includes of course all the parts of the human body and mind and senses, everything! Everything is pervaded by the same playfulness. So this is *prayojana*. It is *jīvanmukti*. And *jīvanmukti*, obviously, is the ever-present consciousness which is never boring, which is never uh routine. The *jīvanmukta* is is ever fresh, ever inspired, and that inspiration is never lost. So this is *prayojana*. And just for simplifying, you can also use my book where I have made a selection, that is a vol chapter 3 page 67 at uh... So I don't analyze uh the word *anuttara* myself because I've been have put that as it in 16 different ways. 16 meanings of *anuttara*. This is one of the highest levels of the tantric teachings. And the number 16 is important because *śataśata* it is always the number of completeness. So, *śataśata-kalā*. And in the verses in the *Pañcāśikā* uh *śataśata-kalā* uh *pūrṇa pūrṇa* consists of 16. 
16 *kalās* means the complete being. And of course, the number 16 derived from the phases of the moon. So, *śataśata-kalā*. So the number is also important. But he goes on in the great details of the word *anuttara* that we will... We can abbreviate some of the meanings because it's not so difficult what he is denying. The first question is that all the great words in their tradition, they started up, and there is an attitude on this side. The... Some of the most central words of the tradition are negations. Like, they'll say *ahaṃśa*. You could say *karma*. Or something, something. So that negation itself is uh very important uh device for avoiding any identification with a particular thing. Plus, when afterwards we come to the whole speculation of the on the alphabet, on the *mātṛkā-mala*, etcetera, where the sound, the phonemes are is the symbol for *anuttara*. And that is also the reason why I have translated *anuttara* as "absolute." Because of course in English, we pronounce everything. But in Latin, it's *absolutum*. Because it is also with a not "e" absolute. *Absolutum*. So this is a universal that the phoneme "a" is the origin of language, and it is the symbol of *anuttara*. So then afterwards you have a whole derivation of "ah" as *anuttara*. "A" is *ānanda*, he tries to pronounce, how they, the vowels are representing a symbolic of uh reality, and that is also the symbolism of *anuttara*. So that is the briefest, briefest definition is "a." And of course... So it is a negation, a negation. And we now good to say is also uh why Śrī in Sanskrit, like in German, this is even a bit... Why don't they say *uttama*? But it is, is very clear why he does use, not he, it's a *tantra*, the Shiva himself or the deity who uses *anuttara*, not *uttama*. He has an explanation for that. It, it is in the uh in the verses. Because then, you may give uh comparative. The effect is something else, and then you make it superlative. Because superlative is something somehow fixed. Now if I say, "You're the best student," well then maybe some other good students also. That, that superlative is always very doubtful. That anything for which you are using superlative, there may be a criticism - may not be the best, or the most beautiful, also. But if you deny a comparative, then nothing can be beyond it. *Anuttara* - that which is, it cannot be transcended. So it is more open. And that openness is precisely shown in these 16 repetitions which give the tremendous openness of meaning. 

So let us see one uh a few we look in detail, and others we can summarize because they are relatively clear. So in my book, it is in page 69. Or in the, this translation, it is page 20. So the first and obvious meaning of *aṇuttarā* is a denial, in the absolute, of anything more additional. But then, what could be that more? I think I'll relate it to the 36 *tattvas* and levels of reality. I hope I don't need to, everybody knows about the 36 *tattvas*, do you need to...? So that... The 34 reality in the *āgamas* is included in the 36 *tattvas* - from earth, the five physical elements up to cosmic elements, up to *tanmātras* and senses, etc. So, the 25, which are equivalent to the *sākhya*, and then plus 11 of the *śaiva āgamas*. So, I don't think anything to... You must have also... Yeah, so this, "but then," that more could be anything after the 36 *tattvas*. And I have translated that *tattvas* into, but so far nobody has protested. Um, mostly they have been translated as cosmology, but it is not sufficient, because there is the cosmos, there is a human being in all these dimensions, and there is the divine. That's why I have called it cosmotheandric reality, because cosmos, cosmos, theos is God, and andric is man. So, the cosmic, the human, and the divine, they are all included in the 36 *tattvas*. Up to *Śiva*, now, you see, how can *Śiva* be after that, but that is not the transcendent *Śiva*. This the 36 *tattva* is *Śiva* as *anaśritā Śiva*, as who is just the highest level of the *tattvas*, but not *anuttara*, and not *Paramaśiva*. So, um, I call the entire cosmotheandric universe - the cosmic, the human, and the divine. *Anuttara* is that which transcends them but is not transcended by them. But the word "transcends" is also to be used with caution, as the following meanings will show. Hence, quote, "The highest, most perfect consciousness, however, is not like this. Because of its essence being unrestrained, non-relative, delightful flash of consciousness." Given this positive description of *anuttara*, it contains two negations. So, the negation is always more important. Unrestrained, non-relative, delightful flash of... If you look at the Sanskrit, page seven... Yeah, page seven... *svayaṃ anākulaṃ anapekṣaṃ kathā camatkāratvāt*. This *para* - *parairava* said, "yasya tāṃ," *svayaṃ anākulaṃ anapekṣaṃ kathā camatkāratvāt*. So, this is what is translated here as "its essence being unrestrained, non-relative, delightful flash of consciousness." So, unrestrained: *anākulam*. It's also a very favorite word of the... *anākula*. *Anākula* is if you tie your, locking a door, you're bolt... It's a bolt. And *anākulam* is unbolted, means unre- stricted, unbound. So, it's one word for freedom which is very uh picturesque, you know, that if something is bolted, then you are bolt- you are bound. *Anākulam* is a freedom, total freedom. *Anākulam anapekṣam*. *Anapekṣa* means not dependent on anything else. And, and the positive, positive is a... *ekīm camatkāratvāt*, because of his sense of wonder. So, the freedom, freedom, the freedom and sense of wonder are most characteristic. And *camatkāra* is the experiential aspect of freedom as newness and as joyful surprise. So, this is the first, first meaning. Second meaning, I have to move from... So, this takes time. 

Second meaning is also straight forward so far as semantics goes. Here, it takes, it takes *uttarah* again in the sense of answer. That is also very beautiful. And hence, *anuttarah* is that state in which there is neither question nor answer. *Anuttara*. So, it's already so clear that there's neither question nor answer - *anuttara*. Kathā na vidyate uttaram praśna prati- *prati vac* - *vacarūpaṃ* yatra. It means, positively, that *anuttara* is that ocean...

Then the fifth meaning... Fifth meaning... That is in "*uttarah*," again in the sense of crossing, overcoming. "*Anuttarah*" denies the necessity to overcome the world and to reach liberation, *mukti*. Because in the highest non-dualism, even the duality of bondage and liberation is absent. You may remember at the end of the beginning of... At the book also, we see this, where he denies all the dualities. Is a... Even bondage and liberation: "*Uttaram uttaram mukhasattatha... Even veda uttaraya tatha santi*." This is here. This is a... This is crossing over. It is not... It is not necessary. It is not fair.

And then he... He, uh... Meaning 6... We are... "*Uttarah*" is taken in the sense of a statement, or a speaking... Speaking about reality in an unlimited way. "It is like this. It is like that," uh... And, uh, the unlimited reality. And, and there for *anuttarah* is that which has not got any limitation, which cannot be denoted by anything. One thing to realize, this is... This like... This is this like... If you, uh... It is a... It cannot be, "a," and it is, "a." See, you know, "God," in theology, in any tradition, does know, "God is like this. God is like that." So this point, in a particular way... This is the denial. 

And seven... Meaning 7. This is very, very important. Exactly the same as you know, like the theology defines his God: "He is like this. He is like that," which is all limitation, limited. So then, a page into the, uh, initiation that... Because of the sense of exclusion, even a simple notation of, "This is only the *Kalpa*," the... This mere thought construct because of its essence being limitation... Yet, yet *chada dittagan*. Therefore, so long as an empirical experience is desirous of entering *anuttarah*, so long he remains in the *Kalpa*. Not this makes it very difficult for... So we are so... Unless that... So that also is a *Kalpa*. So people who go to some, you know... This is very dangerous, this religion field... Field of spirituality. Because you start objectifying something. "Now, I want to go to the Buddhist retreat, because there they will teach me how to, uh, get the realization. How to get, uh..." And so on, and so on. But this is a *Kalpa*. You have to start with a thought, and then that thought has to be, uh, fulfilled. So that's what they say, "For... In the structure, structure to remember... This is one of the elements of this retreat is to... Is the unexpected." And then at the end, then, "Bam, bam!" You say, "Well, for me the unexpected was that it didn't happen." And if you expect the unexpected, then again you... You're pointing to something, you're imagining something you want to have, that kind of experience, that it doesn't happen. Because it is always the same. It is always unexpected. So it's a complete... He goes on and... If, if that modern criticism of, you know, the God-talk, or uh... A *minagupta* has it all here. He criticizes all these projections which we have on the divine, and then these expectations. And then Buddha knows that *Śiva* has to fulfill our expectations, but it is not like that. Because he is ever-present. He ever realized...

He goes on like this. Page 22... 2... Even desiring of entering *anuttarah*, so long he remains in the *Kalpa* of a particular form. In this context, it must be born in mind that that which is indeterminant, *abhi Kalpa*... *Abhi Kalpa*, and necessarily in here and in everything, "*abhinavbhavi*." This is a... It's both the logical and the spiritual concept - that which is ever-present. It is *abhinavbhavi*. It means "without that," nothing exists. So without that divine consciousness, not... There is neither our search or our disappointment. So this is ever *abhinavbhavi*. Nothing exists without them. But we always project. We... We have some idea about it. And this is the word... But... Because this is so tricky, you know. In the beginning of the... Also, the state which you are expecting, that is merely *Kalpa*. The moment you make nearly *Kalpa* into a concept, you again got that... That the nonsense... *Samdam pocha*... You are talking about "*shoonya*," in Buddhism. And then he admitted very frankly, he said, "*Śiva* and we are thinking about '*shoonya*,' and we are..." It is not *shoonya*! It's just out of scope! This is so, so tricky, you know, this whole religious language! It has to be smashed to pieces! And then only that *abhikalpa* can come out, but it can't show itself because it's not our making, "*abhikalpa*." For without it, it... It means *anuttarah*. Even a determined concept cannot appear. In fact, in *anuttarah* contemplation, concentration, etc., are wholly in *anuttara*... The... This is a... Because a little bit disturbing, you know. We are so much attached to our meditation and... Moreover also... What to do? But still he is very careful, because he is not only philosopher. He is a spiritual master. And then he says, "No, don't worry." And he adds immediately, "Not the *parvana* is only useless." That means... It doesn't mean that you shouldn't practice, but you should relativize your practice, or in what state of mind, what state of, uh, you practice, you know, if you are projecting your ideas or you are completely open to that's nearly *Kalpa* to happen. This is a very subtle difference. "Not the *parvana* and so... Your list is very beautiful." 

And then the concept becomes important. "Such *anuttarah*... That is, the nearly *Kalpa*, thought-free *anuttarah*... *Abhaits* even in the life of the world, of the world." The bracket is, of course, really things, addition for those who have its awareness. Because they create a religious world, and then they said, "It must be there." But why not the, not Delhi for, and not Delhi for... 

So... Well, see the Sanskrit? Yeah, you want to look at? Yeah... And the sunset, from the bottom of the page 7. Yeah, from the bottom... Yeah, page 7... Page 7... And the Sanskrit, page 7 on the Sanskrit, and seven lines from the bottom. Yeah, page 7... Yeah, you want to read it out? "*Pravidīkṣo māyā ya tamataṃ kṛtāḥ kalpita devā viśeṣātmanī tattvaṃ pratto avikalpitaṃ tam avikalpitaṃ yat tatra api tatra api ājñāyate...*" In Sanskrit, yaḥ... It *yantaṃ kṛtaṃ evam aṃśaḥ ābhāvaṃ vṛttiśu...*"* Api kīvaḥ... Api kīvaḥ... *Aṃśaḥ vṛttiśu...* In our daily activities, it is equally present. This are not... There is equally present in our daily activities. The *aṃśaḥ vṛttiśu*, even... Even just as it is, in the same way. But then he... He quotes his own *shloka* which I have translated somewhere, uh... It's very... It's a subtle, very difficult... I have translated a thing in the, uh, *aphoristics*, where I have collected these *shloka* fragments. It's very beautiful, seemingly... And it is like... We had just a little bit, really, really afraid, and, uh... When you look at the sky, you don't know it's raining on that time, but when you look at the trees, you can see it on the... On the houses. So on that invisibility of the divine presence, he is... It is there, but we don't notice it. So he gives us such a peculiar imagery for being more careful, more aware of that ever-present, but very subtle, very subtle... 

