Prema kalā śrayā vinava sṛṣṭi mahārjananī, vima kalā śrayā vinava sṛṣṭi mahārjananī. Bharitatnuṣca pañcamukha gupta rūci janakah. Bharitatnuṣca pañcamukha gupta rūci janakah. Tadubhaya yamala sphuṭabhāva visargama yaṁ. Tadubhaya yamala sphuṭabhāva sphuṭabhāva visargama yaṁ. Hṛdaya manuttarāyā amṛta kulaṁ. Mama samsphuratāṁ. Tadubhaya yamala sphuṭabhāva visargama yaṁ. Hṛdaya manuttarāyā amṛta kulaṁ. Mama samsphuratāṁ. Yasyāṁ budhā viśvamidamvihādi vāyāṁ bhāsaṁ bhāsamānaṁ. Viśveśa śobhecchī ne nu tārāyaṁ sthitvāṁ vande devīṁ svāṁ savṛttimikāṁ. Naraśakti śivātmakaṁ trikaṁ. Hṛdaye yā vinidhāya bhāsaye, praṇamāmi paramānuttarāṁ. Nijabhāsāṁ pratimācakṛtim. Jayajayā vipāścitā śrīmātrābhyāṁ guruśāṁbudhum śikāṁtaṁ vandeśvaraṁ. 

This this tin this would be, but uh, many topics have to be mentioned that this also I don't want to give here information about things which are not directly included. But uh, still, just to make it more complete. The tradition of everyone who sitting here is aware that so-called Kaśmīra Śaivism contains a number of uh strings and schools of tantric traditions which have flown together in a great synthesis of Kaśmīra Śaivism, synthesis by Abhinavagupta. And these strings or traditions have been put, uh, nothing has been excluded and, but all the different levels of traditions have been put in a hierarchy. And in certain enumerations of this tradition starts from laukika, the worldly. There's also tradition. We are living; most of our śāstras come from the world. Who will listen to the śāstras? Who are following them? Newspapers and the uh teachers, they will, these are the laukika. But then the next step is Vaidika. So, Veda is one level in the scale of uh traditions. And then comes, of course, uh, different other traditions and jñānasiddhanta and so on. 

Now, within the more specific tantric traditions of Kashmir, is the overall, that at least in the synthesis of Abhinavagupta, which includes all the schools in that uh trika unity. But even within trika, there are levels. And what I said yesterday, why Abhinavagupta has chosen this Kaula because it belongs to the highest level of trika, that is anuttaratrika. So, among the, it can called the esoteric or the spiritual levels of uh these schools, anuttaratrika is the highest. So, this tradition which Abhinavagupta represents is called anuttaratrika or parākrama. And eka vīra, more, eka vīra refers to the followers or those who are entitled or practicing or experiencing this uh mystical tradition, who are in the intense solitary heroes. A hero is, of course, the spiritual hero. And that sometimes it does not appear in a translation, but uh, it includes, of course, within it. It doesn't mean only vīra that means only bhogya. So, there is also eka vīra or yogi vīra, those who are solitaries who are not uh practicing either with a deity or um, they're following a solitary path, which is the highest, most difficult, the most subtle, most esoteric. Parākrama and vīra, they have the title of the tantra itself, parātriśikha. It is the tradition of parā means the supreme goddess, who is even beyond the three like vyāpika, parā, parāparā, but then parā alone is on the top and she is the supreme. And here the word parā is devoted to her. And not to the trika of parāparāpara, but to parā alone. That is why parātriśikha.

Now, there's a confusion about the title because many, many authors uh, including the Sanskrit authors, of course, um, call it parātriṁśikā. Triṁśikā, that would mean um text containing 30 verses or 32 verses and containing 35, 36 verses according to the counting. But Abhinavagupta makes it very clear that it's not the real meaning. The real meaning relates to the goddess parā and not to the number. Uh, of course, that also include parā, but uh he makes it very clear in uh a quotation about the name because again and again people call it parātriṁśikā. So, to clarify it once and for all that um, we have to to see what Abhinavagupta himself says about the title. And he's uh quoted by Abhinavagupta also anuttara sūtra. Sūtra for the tantra because this is esoteric. Sūtra is the very condensed and essential content, uh which doesn't refer to the form of the sūtra, but to the uh very condensed form of uh of the tantra itself. And he calls his own commentary anuttaraprakriyā. And then he uh, to see what the meaning of prakriyā. Prakriyā means also the method of of approaching uh the. And also as I have called my book "The Hermeneutics", the method of uh interpretation and the method of practice. Prakriyā is very much related to practice. 

Still it is there. He describes uh the upadeśa. Upadeśa is a subject matter itself. It is same call in the śāstra has something, something of uh who is authorized, what is the purpose by upadeśa and who is authorized tries to study, to practice it, and what is the subject matter of this abhidharma? And he says īśikā is a compound word. This is the analysis of īśikā of the three, of the three means iccha jñāna kriyā. This is a three śaktis, the three of desire by Abhinavagupta, it's śaktiśaktiśakti because of power or buddhi yoga. Abhinavagupta generally uses a technical term for the karma system. Īśvara means īśvarī because it governs and controls the three, that is iccha jñāna kriyā śaktis of īśvarī, which is saṃhāra or buddhi yoga. Abhinavagupta generally uses a technical term for. It should be borne in mind that īśvara of governance or control in this context means being non-different or identical with that which is to be governed or controlled. So, the non-duality, non-dualism, it starts from the very beginning. So, īśikā does not mean to control something which is different. But that non-duality is already implied. Therefore, the īśvara paraśakti, that is the Supreme Divine Consciousness, who at once transcends his creation of three and is identical with it, is the abhidharma subject matter of the book. And because of its connection with parā, the title of this śāstra is Triśikā. Another reading of Triśikā given by Abhinavagupta is trimsáť ślokaḥ, but this is not so common as Triśikā. That which speaks out, what is the analysis of trimsáť ślokaḥ that which speaks out the three śaktis or powers is trimsáť ślokaḥ. The word trimsáť ślokaḥ derives from its connection with thirty-three trimsáť ślokaḥ or triśikā verses. This is not correct. Abhinavagupta himself says, "Even though this is not the number of verses, but only the sense of the śāstra should be adopted." So, this is just to clarify about the title. 

So, we are in the highest spiritual tradition of Śaivism, and that is what definitely attracted Abhinavagupta to this tantra. Now, those of us who have studied the Vijñāna Bhairava, they may remember that the Vijñāna Bhairava is also said to be a part or the essence of uttara-yāmalā tantra. And the same is said here in the end. Although, of course, there's a debate meaning of this uttara-yāmalā, is it the pair of pūrva and uttara, but also in relation to a larger text with the eighty uttara-yāmalā misses are very near. But these two uh prescriptions are definitely not correct because such a uttara-yāmalā does not exist. I think that has been proven now that um, both these tantras, first of all, they're very different in style and in content. And they could not be part of the same larger text, uttara-yāmalā and. It is a tendency also in the Indian tradition that if a text is short that to ascribe it to, to a larger text, uttara-yāmalā, which have thousands of verses, you know, which gives it more weight and authority, but uh it is the uttara-yāmalā which Abhinava has published is not definitely not the same text. And no such text has been found, and that is why we can accept when Abhinava says that in the uttara-yāmalā, we ascribed to the context that it is a matter of the union of Śiva and Śakti, parāparaśakti, which is the essence of the whole text, whether it's Vijñāna Bhairava or the Triśikā. So, this description we can uh assume that it is fictitious and uh we apply it to the to the meaning of that, the essence of the both tantras which start with a dialogue between Devi and Bhairava and between them. So, that is why uttara-yāmalā is the result of the union. And this union is, of course, what has to happen in every yogī or practitioner who lives with this text and practices with this text. Starting from non-dualism, starting from question and answer, question and answer, and then leading to complete union. So, this dynamism is there in both, both the tantras. And that is why it is ascribed to the uttara-yāmalā. 

Now um, what we have recited, what we have heard yesterday, and we recited just now, uh, the maṅgala ślokas to the Divine. And also, first to, normally they will witness for maṅgala ślokas uh, and maybe some of them, sometimes I've been criticised to spending too much time in maṅgala ślokas, but it is like the Western music, you know, if you have a great, great piece of music, the overture, it is already something very beautiful and powerful, and of course, which makes you then enter into the whole piece, etcetera. So, I have two comparisons for the maṅgala ślokas, one is the musical overture and the other is when you go to a Southern Indian temple and you pass through so many doorways and until you finally reach the center and the garb agree, how it is also. So, the maṅgala ślokas are also like that, you have to go step-by-step, and, but it's all beautiful, every. They're not just doors or gates, but they are beautiful. And that is why the maṅgala ślokas are also such beautiful verses which contain, as I've called it once, philosophy in a nutshell. And uh, so it is a condensation in a poetic form of what is going to follow. So, that is why we have to forgive me if we do start with the maṅgala ślokas because they really give us the essence for the entire text. 

So, what we have done yesterday, what we have listened to from uh Angie, was a verse which Abhinava Gupta has liked so much and has given it so much importance that he has used it as a maṅgala. It's not that he was short of creativity, he could have made any number, but he gave so much importance, he used it for the Malini Vijaya Vārtika, for the Tantrāloka, and for the Tantrasāra, and for the Pratyabhijñā Vivriti, for four very important texts, means practically all his tantric texts. He used this first maṅgala. And because this is, of course, very typical tantric uh religious because it contains at least two levels of meaning which are already indicating the content. And when it is often said that the Indian or Sanskrit authors they're very impersonal, you know, they don't uh show their own personality, but this is not at all true for Abhinava. He has not felt shy to expose his own uh experience, his own tradition, his own gurus, his own parents, his own disciples, and so there is a personal element to this first maṅgala. And of course, a universal. So, the personal and the universal, they have to go together in the tantric tradition. 

Now, if you have my book, you can open at page forty-four. And I have uh expressed the doubt, but I am sure that nobody will follow me that this maṅgala verse is most adapted to the Parā-Triśikā because it contains some of the core words and directly indicates us the content of the Triśikā. But as we have seen yesterday, that there is a sequence of this text and the Mālinī-Vijayottara-Vārtika is definitely composed before. And that also was a Śiva tantra, so my theory is not correct. But still, I feel that it is most adapted for Parā-Triśikā. Because the the terms he uses here, himālaya śrayā abhinava sṛṣṭi mahājananī kalitatanūcchapañcamukhaguptā ucchṛṅkhaṇakravā tat-ubhaya-yāmalasphuṭitā pādavikāsatamāyam hṛdayaṃ anuttarāmṛtakulamahasamsphurattāt. So, here the the core terms, of course, yāmalā hṛdaya, because the heart is the central concept, is not the right word, central symbol of the entire tantric contemplation. And uttara amṛta-kula. So, these terms are so central to uh and visible, including visible in all the different levels of meaning which we are coming across now. So, I have given several translations in my book in different languages, but I would like to analyze it what I have done on pages forty-six, forty-seven. Because this terms are so multi-layered and so intimately connected with the meaning of the entire text. See, it is all about hṛdaya, heart. But I go through it, and this uh little patience we can have because uh it will help us to understand how I have analyzed it uh phrase by phrase or word. himālaya śrayā, himālaya was also the name of Abhinavagupta's guru. himālaya śrayā āśraya, the support and kalā, of course, it has so many meanings, but it means also energy, the support of the pure energy. And this himālaya as the name of Abhinavagupta's guru. So, we have immediately two layers of meaning, the the pure energy and at the same time the mother, his mother. abhinava-sṛṣṭi-mahā, the joy in the new creation. And immediately you see, of course, abhinava is there. The first time has abhinava, and in the second line is guptā. And the first line abhinava is related to the mother, and guptā is related to the father. So, again you have the yāmalā immediately at both levels. Because who gives new creation? It's a mother, it's a mother who gives that new uh birth and creation. Generally, of course, but generally, both again the sense of mother and of the Śakti, the universal mother. parītātanūḥ, that whose body or that whose nature is full of complete bliss, that's father. jāgrat, whose nature is complete. pañcamukhaguptā ucci, whose glory or we said it's hidden. This five faces, normal symbolic expression which pañcamukha also means uh Śiva and because uh Abhinavagupta's father was Śambhugupta. So, uh it is indicated in that way. And that Pañcāśikā in relation to Śiva refers to these five energies. This is a Cidānandalaharī cakranāḍiyā, five energies or the five phases. This is not related to um Sadāśiva five faced, not here, but still to the five uh energies. And Gupta means hidden, of course. So, those five phases or five energies can both reveal and hide Śiva. And it is an indication of Śambhugupta, Nāgaśambhugupta, Abhinavagupta's father, Janaka's father. Both in relation to Śiva and to his human father. That Upaya-jñāna. Now, the union of these two and the union in relation to Śiva and Śakti and to the parents of Abhinavagupta. So, Abhinavagupta's living mother Gupta, the living father, and then the reunion of the two which uh from which Abhinavagupta was born. And we know that he has been called in this text Kauladṛṣṭi, he has been called Yoginībhū, born from Yoginīs. And Yoginībhū are those uh Siddhas who are, from mother's womb, they are Yoginīs or they are already perfect from their mother's womb. Because the conception has taken place in a kula ritual, uh we call it ritual, but in that state of consciousness where the Siddha will be born. So, Abhinavagupta is called Yoginībhū, born from Yoginī. And again, as the mother is not called, he's never called Siddha-pī. Because after the birth, she's living with her mother. So, Yoginībhū and uh Abhinava related to their mother. And now this Spṛta-bhāva-. It's a Abhayāṃ which consists in creativity in a state of vibrancy. This āgama is a very simple term in the whole text. And Spṛhati means to shine, to sparkle, to vibrate, to be manifest. This Spṛhatā is one of these beautiful dynamic uh concepts. The the vibration and the sparkling of light, the flashing forth is one of those dynamic terms uh which express the Śakti element. And and this time uh we will come to. All these terms are very esoteric and very uh practical uh dimension, of course, also in grammar. This Anusvāra has two dots. And these two dots represent Śiva and Śakti. And here Spṛhatā, yes. The same, the same root Spṛ Spṛhati. It comes as an adjective, and then at the end the word which makes an essence, Spṛhatā. Saṃspṛhatāt means it uh may, may it uh unfold, may it manifest, may it flash forth. And what? My heart, Mahākula. May it flash forth in that luminosity, in that dynamic light. The joyful dynamism of manifestation. So, there is the adjective, and then sentence. So, may my heart. And and as Sanskrit rightly says, this whole verse is a prayer for enlightenment. Because may my heart flash forth, burst out in this light uh and this uh dynamic uh consciousness which is light-filled. Maṃ Mahākula-saṃspṛhatāt. This is a prayer for enlightenment. And Anuttarāmṛtakula-. This uh belongs uh is attributed to the great, to the heart. So, what is this heart? Which kind of heart? That which is the totality of the nectar of the Absolute. So, it is not some small individual heart, that is Anuttarāmṛtakula-, that is Mahākula, again has so many levels of meaning, but here also in the sense of that wholeness, the totality of the nectar of the Absolute, of that heart. So, this heart is both the heart of consciousness and the universal heart of Śiva. And uh, yeah, then the compound qualifier Uttara can be translated as the totality or yes. The. Now, Kula also means body. And in that case, the heart would be qualified with the Anāthābāśita-paśupatācāra- Śrīmānādyavidyaguruśāmbhu- śrīcandra- Parameśvara-. Here the Parameśvara vidyaguruśāmbhu- śrīcandra- Parameśvara- of incomparable greatness, who cleaves asunder the bondage of the multitude of bound souls. The Bāśita-paśupatācāra uh. This. Now, here again there is a double, two levels of meaning. One is the divine Śāmbhu. And Śiva or Śambhunātha, the guru of Abhinavagupta, to whom he owed his enlightenment. Śāmbhunātha, who was his enlightening guru and his guru in Kula Kaula tradition. So, so this double meaning is definitely here. And Śrīcandra is also the form of Śiva from whom the entire tradition has descended. And Parameśvara is again uh double meaning. It is, of course, Śiva, but also Maheśvara was one of Abhinavagupta's gurus. So, the immediately the divine and the human are thus uh united. And uh Abhinavagupta in each one of his works, he pays obeisance to the guru from whom he has received that particular tradition. Because he has received from so many gurus different traditions. And then he pays obeisance to that guru. And of course, every time to Śiva with his mantra. But here Śambhunātha, who is both uh his enlightening guru and because this work has a lot to do with his own enlightenment. And that's why the first verse is very meaningful here. But then the the verse five, which we are not reciting, um, this important again because he does only refer to his gurus, but also to his disciples. So, for whom does he compose such a beautiful and complex text? And he says it very explicitly at the end, at the very end, naming them all the different disciples for whom who have prompted him tonight this commentary. Now, this is very beautiful. Nijasiṣyāvibodhāya prabodhasmaraṇāyan ca Mayā Abhinavaguptena yat śāmbhavyam kriyatāṃ mama. I have composed, I I it says Abhinavagupta, "I have made some effort, some slight effort" uh in composing this uh work. For whom? Nijasiṣyāvibodhāya, "In order to enlighten my own disciples." And prabodhasmaraṇāyan ca, "And to remind those already enlightened." That is very significant. For what? For whom is such a work written? Of course, for enlightenment, the unenlightened. If there are disciples, because if they are not disciples, they won't even take it seriously. So, for his own disciples in order to enlighten them. But if they are already enlightened, Prabodhasmaraṇa, then what is the use of reminding them? That's very necessary. Because you know in the Advaita Vedānta, there are three levels, Aparabodha. So, these are the unenlightened who need to be Prabodha, and then Saṃbodha. So, the fully enlightened, if you have a Bodha, then he doesn't need to be reminded. He is established forever. But Prabodha are those who have received some enlightening experience, but they are not yet established. And I think this is very important because if there is a state in between, where I'm sure everybody has some kind of, unless we wouldn't be sitting here. But how to get established in that? By reading those texts, by getting some instruction, by uh being reminded of your own experience. And that, that is where this text is important. So, to be reminded of that which we already have. And that is, of course, much more corresponding to pratibhā jñāna. Because it's not a new theory, you have it already. But you have to be reminded of it. And uh that is where this text is extremely important for the individual. Prabodhasmaraṇāyan ca. 

Now, in this Vedānta. All this five āgamas uh uh uh revealed in the form of dialogue. And it with uh Śaiva Siddhanta āgamas, sometimes it is uh the between different forms of Śiva or, but in the non-dualistic āgamas, it is always Śiva, the devi uh Bhairava and Śiva. And this dialogue is uh uh beautifully explained in the Svacchanda-tantra that uh it is not a dialogue in the sense of the dualistic uh you know that there is a, the Śakti is totally non-dual and Śiva also is already and she has to ask questions also that that the questioner and the answerer are part of the same consciousness, but the devi assumes the role of a questioner in order to bring forth the revelation. So, she assumes the role of the sādhaka. And uh so Abhinavagupta emphasizes this conception of this that it is actually within the non-dualistic relationship of Śiva and Śakti that this dialogue takes place. And that is why it is so stressful between that the yamalā, the, there are, they are merging towards unity, but they have to be separate in order to bring this revelation out. And that is why the devi assumes the role of a sādhaka. And she asks the question, and later on in the text, you will see she is questioning, questioning. Because it's through that question that this whole revelation takes place. And as we have seen yesterday, that Abhinavagupta calls his commentary Praśnavyākhyā, the explanation of the question, not of the answer, answer comes afterwards, but the question is so important here. And that's why the first uh verses of the tantra are uh related to, central to the entire text. 

Now, we have uh decided that uh later on when we have the recitation, we did decide the entire tantra that the um and you receive it because all we will do it in the way we have done the Gaṇeśa. Uh that's why you have the list of the only of the tantric verses of the answer. So that we get an impression of the whole text by reciting and. Now, we have uh decided that uh the later on when we have the recitation, we did decide the entire tantra that the uh and you receive it because all we will do it in the way we have done the Gaṇeśa uh, that's why you have the list of the only of the tantric verses of the answer, so that we get an impression of the whole text by reciting and. So, I'm not deciding that just on the basis of this She Devi mantra. And that's the whole interpretation of this mantra because Anuttarāṁ gatāṁ devāḥ satyakaulikasiddhim yena vijñātamapyenā kiñcid asau na vetti. This one verse contains tremendous powerful words. And as I said yesterday, it is the only mantra to my knowledge, maybe there are others, but this tantra, Jñānārṇava and the Tantrāloka, both starting with anuttara. The very first word, anuttara. Now, every word will receive extensive commentary by Abhinavagupta, and this is very, even if you do only one verse, you will get. So, as I said yesterday, the title of our seminar is Quest for an Uttara, and this is the translation of anuttara gatām. How to go beyond it, I don't want to give a simple translation, but satyam satyam kaulikasiddhīm anuttara. This anuttara and kaulikasiddhīm anuttara kaulikasiddhīm anuttara means that which restores the perfection of, of kula and the perfection of the totality. That's just one translation of kulakaula. How to go beyond it, the bondage of, of māyā. The dasa one realize in fact that absolute. Now, anuttara, of course, you have found sixteen interpretations of anuttara which Abhinavagupta gives an anuttara. Literally, that which has not taken beyond, that which is uh anuttara, which is not not taken beyond it. The answer part, satyam. Suddenly restores the perfection of the kaulika perfection, perfection of unity. Yena, by which, vijñātamapyenā, by the mere knowledge of it, by the mere intuitive knowledge of it, one attains kiñcid asau na vetti. Now, kiñcid asau na vetti is here the the most difficult of all these, but kiñcid asau na vetti is very crucial word. The the equality or harmony with Śiva. Now, the Śiva, I'm not translating it here because well come. Literally, of course, it means the one, the power, the energy who is moving in this creation, in fact, in the field of consciousness. Kiñcid asau na vetti to depict that harmony or complete equality with the power moving in the field of consciousness by a mere knowledge. So, vijñātamapyenā already implies not by ritual, not by any, nothing by yoga, neither by ritual nor by yoga, but by knowledge. So, this is gnostic tradition. This is gnostic tradition. But satyam satyam, spontaneous, spontaneously attained. That which uh bestows the perfection of the eternity spontaneously or suddenly, of the nectar of the absolute. Mama, my, my heart. But that sounds very, why should Abhinavagupta restrict it to his heart? And there I must say Sanderson's interpretation in a very, very long article on this maṅgalaśloka says it's not a limited mind, but that mind is allowing to that central higher consciousness which is not limited to an individual, but it is the universal higher which can any body, any body can see mama hṛdi. So, it is that universal higher consciousness that the prayer is for enlightenment of that I which is both personal and universal. It is both uh personal and divine. So, mama has uh the the much wider meaning, I have a whole section of mama in the book itself, than any individual possessiveness. My heart, my hṛdi, the universal heart. And Sanderson said that may it flourish and fold, manifest completely. And here the prefix sam is very important. Sam is total, complete, and also in the sense of the yamalā. Now, this the pair of Śiva and Śakti and of the father, mother and father of anuttara. So, saṁsṛdāt means together, together or completely. Because it is only the coming together of Śiva and Śakti and of mother and father which brings about the either the creation or the enlightenment. And this is the, these two levels of meaning which are implied in the whole verses. And there I think this and so the principle meaning is an invocation of that reality embodied in the fusion of Śiva and Śakti. And of course, as I said at the end of my presentation, spiritually or from the point of view of yoga, the heart can only flourish or be illumined if that union, yamalā, takes place in the very body of the practitioner, that means when prāṇa and apāna unite in the maṇipūraka, in the central vein, in the middle path and become one, and then that enlightenment takes place so that duality if you merging into oneness. 

Now, the following verses are specifically related to the practitioner. And the Goddess Parā is auspicious. In verse two, she is called ekām. If the traditions of ekāmbā. It means the solitary hero and the solitary Goddess without any partner. Ekāṁ śivayuvati. But it's very interesting how to give an interpretation because here for them Śakti is the in the nature of the cit śakti and cit śakti yet chaitanya chaitanya prabha. They are only Śakti, there's no Śiva. So, this, that's why ekāmbikā, because it's only Śakti. Śiva normally, of course, you have Śiva, but Abhinavagupta gives here another interpretation, Śiva, but not so. So, she is ekā. She is the one. And so in my translation, "Vande deviṁ bhaktānāṁ siddhipratikām 

And immediately that nondualism comes that this worshipping or praising that one goddess is not praising another, but praising svātantrya, your very own consciousness. When the deity in svātantrya vikā, because that deity, she in whom, within whom the whole universe shines. So, she's again neither separated from one's own consciousness nor separated from the whole external universe because the universe shines within her. Yaśyā antaḥ diśaṃ pūrṇatāṃ prapatti, in whom this universe appears is an external objective existence, bāhya abhāsa. In creation, there are this, these two movements, the outward movement in creation and then the return movement: sṛṣṭi karma, saṃhārakarma. And in the sṛṣṭi karma, it appears that this goddess appears as external existence or appeared or appearing to us in creation. There must be some reason. But there is a condition, and immediately the yogi is involved here. Yogi jñānam uttara yānti daurāt tāṃ ekāṃ, this svāṃ, who the moment your agitation or your distraction is dissolved, she appears in the form of absolute in the state of the unsurpassed reality. So, one is the external manifestation which is multiple, which is uh, but then the moment our distraction, our agitation ends, then she appears with what she is, that is, in the state of the absolute, in her absolute nature. Yogi jñānam uttara yānti daurāt. When the deity in svātantrya vikā, again here, this four lines, so much is contained about the very essence of the goddess' consciousness. She contains the whole universe. Nothing is external. She is all-encompassing consciousness. But our condition for realizing her is nothing but yogic vision. Dissolved that show the agitation, the destructive uh uh, yeah distraction of the disturbance, mental disturbance. There's no objective, nothing objective can hinder us. It's only our own mental agitation which hinders us from seeing her in her real absolute reality. And that uh of course is related to svātantrya svātantrya, of course uh is very much connected with this idea of kṣobha parihīnatadasyātmā padam. When that agitation ends, then the supreme state is manifest. So, it is such an easy thing that what Utpaladeva says at the end of this īśvarapratyabhijñā kārikā, it is a very easy path. Easy because you only have to recognize this svātantrya, and recognition is only prevented by your kṣobha, by your disturbance, your mental disturbance. Nobody else is responsible for it. We always blame circumstances, other people, this or that, the whole situation for our kṣobha. But we ourselves responsible. And the moment that disappears, then this recognition can happen. 

Now, it is also not uh by chance and in all these verses that goddess would have have shine because again, again because the shining manifestation of the goddess and of the universal manifestation, vitāti bhāsam abhāsam. And when all that abhāsa, you know, abhāsa means it's not mean and illusory. It means precisely the shining manifestation of the divinity. And the verse three. Now it comes to the trika. Significant in verse two, she is praised as ekāṃ, the one. In verse three, we have the trika, the normal trika of Shaivism: the Parāśakti, the śivā, and Parāśaktiśivātmakaṃ trikāṃ. It is again yā vibhavāyabhāsayet, tanmātraparāṃanuttarāṃ citābhāsaṃ pratibhāti yā. It's again very rich and beautiful verse which contains a lot of material also for aesthetics because pratibhāti and the the wonder. And here again, the whole path transcending the entire shining abhāsa. Now, I almost forgot this: supreme goddess' absolute parāṃ anuttarāṃ. The wonder of it with within itself, pratibhāti. Now, pratibhā and pratibhāti, they are again both related to the aesthetic experience and to the mystical experience. That illumination that in inside of pratibhā. And the wonder which is produced by both the aesthetic experience and by the spiritual experience. Self-radiance, citābhāsaṃ, manifesting herself and holding in her heart the trinity, man and nature. Now, śaktiśivātmakaṃ, vibhavāya abhāsayet. So, that shows that she is greater than the three. She embraces all the three in her heart. So, she is beyond the trika as a still separation of the three, but she is that one who holds in her heart our trika, constituting the entire shining reality. So, from each one of these verses, it is clear that Parā is beyond, beyond the three, beyond the two and beyond the three. She is the one containing everything within, within her heart. Again, in verse one, hṛdaya was very important, and here again hṛdaya. The heart, and it's very clear, this is not the individual, not the limited. This is the cosmic, the uh all-containing divine heart. And of course, hṛdaya has found its fantastic uh definitions. This is the definition by Abhinavagupta: "The heart is the light of consciousness because or insofar as it is the foundation of the entire universe." This is a definition by Abhinavagupta in the Viśvamātarīśvarastvamātrat citprakāśo 'pi hi. Fantastic definition of heart that that the heart is the light of consciousness being the foundation of the entire universe. So, here immediately the concept of the heart, the symbol of the heart, which pervades the entire uh text. 

Now, this form, it is traditional, of course, in a maṅgala or in maṅgala ślokas, you praise the divine, your iṣṭadevatā, and then you praise your guru or gurus, and then you get to the content, what's the विषय uh of the entire text. So, here, the goddess has been praised in two verses, and in verse four, it's the guru, the divine guru who is praised. But also the the lineage of gurus. Jayatkānta vibhūṣita padāmbuja śrīmatādya guruśambhoḥ śrīkaṇṭhaparāmeśvara. He, the parama ādyaguru śambhoḥ, śrīkaṇṭhaparāmeśvara, of incomparable greatness, who cleaves asunder the bondage of the multitude of bound souls, vibhāṣita bhaṣita bhuja. Uh, yes. Now, here again, there is a double, two levels of meaning. One is the divine śambhu and śiva or śambunātha, the guru of Abhinavagupta, to whom he owed his enlightenment, śambhunātha, who was his enlightening guru, and his guru in कुल क्रम tradition. So, the this double meaning is definitely here. And śrīkaṇṭha is supposed to the form of Śiva from whom the entire tradition has descended. And parāmeśvara is again a double meaning. It is, of course, Śiva, but also Maheśvara was śambhu Abhinava Gupta's guru's guru. So, the immediately the divine, the human, and then as uh united. And the Abhinavagupta in each one of his works, he pays obeisance to the guru from whom he has received that particular tradition. Because he has received from so many different traditions, and then he pays obeisance to that guru. And of course, every time to Śiva, it is very clear, but here śambhunātha who is brought uh in his enlightening guru, and because this work has a lot to do with this form enlightenment and that's why the first class is very meaningful here. But then the verse five, which we are not reciting, um is important again because he doesn't only refer to his gurus, but also to his disciples. So, for whom does he compose such a beautiful and complex text? And he says very explicitly that the end, at the very end, namely the all the different disciples for whom he was prompted him to write this commentary. Now, this is very beautiful: "Nityaśiśiśivabhutāyaprabhutasmaraṇāñca mayā abhinavagupttena śambhvaya priyatamānāḥ", I have composed uh, I can say Abhinavagupta, "I have made some effort, some slight effort", ahaṃ, in composing this uh work. For whom? He addresses śivabhutāya, "In order to enlighten 

that own disciples and for Buddha-smaraṇārtham and to remind those already enlightened". Now, that's very significant. For what? For whom is the student? Of course, for anybody, the unenlightened. If they are disciples, because if they are not disciples, they won't take it seriously. So, for his own disciples in order to enlighten them. But if they are already enlightened by Buddha, then what is the use of reminding them? It's very necessary. Because you know in the as under Kaula tantra, there are three levels: aprāptabuddha. So, these are the unenlightened who need to be buddhā and subuddhā. So that fully enlightened, if you have a buddhā, then he doesn't need to be reminded. He is established forever. But aprāptabuddha are those who have received some enlightenment experience, but they are not yet established. And this is very important because there is a state in between. There, I'm sure everybody had some enlightened always, we don't receive anything. But how to get established in it? By avoiding mistakes, by taking some instruction, by uh being reminded of spiritual experience. And that, that is where the text is important. So, to be reminded of that which we already have. And that is, of course, much more corresponding to pratyabhijñā, because it's not a new thing, you have it already. But you have to be reminded of it. And uh that is where this text is extremely important. Buddha-smaraṇārtham. 

Now, if we start with the. Now, all the Śaiva Āgamas are um revealed at the foot of the divine and in the older Śaivaśaiva Āgama, sometimes it is um between different forms of Śiva or, but in the non-dualistic Āgamas, it is always between the Devi and the uh Bhairava, you see. And this dialogue is uh beautifully explained in this Svacchanda tantra that uh it is not a dialogue in the sense of the dualistic. Um, you know, there is a, the Śakti, she is totally ignorant and Śiva who is all-knowing, and then she has to ask questions. But that the questioner and the answerer are part of the same consciousness. But the Devi assumes the role of a questioner in order to bring forth that revelation. So, she assumes the role of a disciple. And uh so Svacchanda tantra explains it very beautifully, this, that it is actually within the non-dualistic relationship of Śiva and Śakti that this dialogue takes place. And that is why the world just was spoken by the yamalaka. They, they are there working towards unity. But they have to be separate in order to bring this revelation out. And that is why the Devi assumes the role of the disciple. And she asks the questions, and later on in the text, even say she is questions passionate. Because it's through that question that this whole revelation takes place. And as we have seen yesterday, that Abhinavagupta calls his commentary praśnavyākhyā, the explanation of the question, not of the answer. Answer comes later. But the question is so important here. And that's why the first uh verses of the tantra are very central to the entire text. 

Now, we have uh decided that that we leave them by, we have the basic vision, we leave aside the entire tantra either uh Manjuśrī teaches or reveals them, and then we have directly Bhairava. Uh, that's why you have the list of the content of the tantra versus chapter. So that you get an impression of the whole text by reciting. And then. Now, they have uh they say that the lemma by, we have the basic vision, we leave aside the entire tantra either uh Manjuśrī teaches or reveals them the way we have Tantra together. Uh, that's why we have the list of the content of the tantra versus chapter. So that you get an impression of the whole text by reciting. And then Anuttaraṃ kṛtaṃ deva satya-kaulika-siddhiḥ yena vijñāta-mātreṇa kecideva samādhanaṃ vrajet. This one verse contains tremendous powerful words. And as we said yesterday, it is the only tantra to my knowledge where they can really use a Buddhist tantra are not very fond of the word Anuttara. The very first word, Anuttara. Now, every word we will see that extensive commentary by Abhinavagupta. And this is very, even if you do only one verse, you would get the full. So, as I said yesterday, the title of our seminar is Quest for the Absolute, and this is the translation of Anuttara Kaula. How to realize that, I don't want to give a simple translation uh. Read Devi Ucchiṣṭa. And this whole interpretation of this tantra will be Anuttaraṃ kṛtaṃ deva satya-kaulika-siddhiḥ. Anuttara, this Anuttara and kaulikasiddhitaḥ mātreṇa. That which bestows the perfection of Kaula. The perfection of the totality. But let's just now translation of Kaula Kaula. How to realize that by Anuttara completely. This one reveals that absolute. Now, anuttara, of course, we will come six different interpretations of anuttara which I don't want to discuss now because they are. Literally, that which has nothing beyond, that which is uh Anuttara, which is not nothing beyond it. The answer possible argument. Which certainly bestows the perfection of the Kaula perfection. Perfection of the time. Yena, by which. Vijñāta-mātreṇa, by the mere knowledge of it, by the mere intuitive knowledge of it. One attains kecideva samādhanaṃ. But kecideva samādhanaṃ is here the most because it you also. But kecideva samdrāk is really crucial word. Then equality or harmony with Śiva. Now, but this Śiva, I am not translating it here because literally because it means the one, the power, the energy who is moving in this crown in that state of consciousness. kecideva samdrāk vrajet to attain that harmony or complete equality with the power moving in the space of consciousness. By mere knowledge. So, vijñāta-mātreṇa already implies not by ritual, not by any, not even by yoga. Neither by ritual nor by yoga, but by knowledge. So, this is Gnostic tradition. It is a Gnostic tradition. But satya satya, spontaneous. Spontaneously. That which uh bestows the perfection of the totality spontaneously or suddenly. Tender six translation of, "How does the answer of the divine consciousness bring about immediately the achievement of their identity?" Now, what tenderness does and I am. We are extremely grateful for this translation, but in translating the verses of the tantra, as in the case of the Vijñanabhairava, he sometimes adds what is in the commentary without putting it in bracket. So, I prefer that especially his sutra or tantra translation to be very close to the original. Even if many things are missing which you have to take it from the commentary. So, he he adds it here, "It brings about immediately the achievement of the identity of the empirical I with the perfect I-consciousness of Śiva." It comes about in this very physical body. When here the physical body is this kaulikasiddhi that says. And by the mere knowledge of it, vijñāta-mātreṇa, one acquires oneness with the universal of consciousness power. So, his translation of the commentary is very, I mean, in some cases I would prefer another one, but I'm still very grateful because it is a very difficult job. And uh, but in the verses one has because he asks his disciples to to uh commenting. So, it's better to to prepare uh purely to the words used, that part is easier. So, in your personal reading time, I recommend all of you to read the notes. Uh, śāstrī's notes are very useful, but uh the make my own personal notes. So, with this uh only with the words of Śaṅkara, first question of the day. We will conclude this first session, and then uh the afternoon we come to the uh commentary on the uh first word and then. But before he comes to comment on another verse, he gives the wonderful um introduction to the whole topic. So, what you mark in the book on page eight, eight and nine, that will do, that is enough. And then we can keep on going uh through the text in. So, now I think it's much more uh that we start in the afternoon, we start uh uh translation page eight. And uh the Sanskrit is always a little difficult to to go up and down with the text. Now, uh Sanskrit is on page two, two forty. And at eleven, we have half an hour tea break, and then at eleven thirty uh reciting. Those of us who are already some practice with the uh gadyabhāṣā. So, and the others can listen and then you can join in as you catch up with the uh recitation. So, we we recite the entire chapter. It gives us the basis for our work to do, and then we take up the commentaries.

