Premalākṣayā vinava sṛṣṭi mahārjananī Premalākṣayā vinava sṛṣṭi mahārjananī  Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha goptaruci janakaḥ  Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha goptaruci janakaḥ  Tadubhayāmalasphuratāvāviśargamamyaṁ  Tadubhayāmalasphuratāvāviśargamamyaṁ Hṛdaya manutararāṃṛtakolam  Hṛdaya manutararāṃṛtakolam Mamasaṁsphuratām Tadubhayāmalasphuratāvāviśargamamyaṁ  Tadubhayāmalasphuratāvāviśargamamyaṁ Hṛdaya manutararāṃṛtakolam  Hṛdaya manutararāṃṛtakolam Mamasaṁsphuratām  Mamasaṁsphuratām 

Asmadrūpasamāveṣṭaha svātmanātmanivāraṇe śivaḥ karotu nijayā namaḥ śaktyātmāne  Asmadrūpasamāveṣṭaha svātmanātmanivāraṇe śivaḥ karotu nijayā namaḥ śaktyātmāne  Asmadrūpasamāveṣṭaha svātmanātmanivāraṇe śivaḥ karotu nijayā namaḥ śaktyātmāne  Asmadrūpasamāveṣṭaha svātmanātmanivāraṇe śivaḥ karotu nijayā namaḥ śaktyātmāne   

matter suddenly names for the Shakti. Why did that specific teacher that the commentary doesn't go in because this it was given it was obvious. But, uh, I find two reasons. One is, of course, to connect if with one another that especially Abhinavagupta wants to show that there is no break in these different stages of *kriyā*. *Kriyā*, uh, *gocaryā gocaryā*, *dhyānaṁ gocaryā*, *vicāra gocaryā*. That they are not separated. They are ultimately only aspects of the same *kriyā* of the center of *Shakti*. And that is going to demonstrate it with very concrete examples from the field of emotions. And the other reason, which is obvious to us who know that the fundamental meaning of *kecarī*, the one who is moving in the sky in perfect consciousness, it means freedom. So that ultimately, the what *svātantrya* is a more abstract. The *kecarī* is a very living, lively the And that's where the birds. And so that flying in this space in the unlimited space. And that is, uh, definitely a reason why this very lively term has been chosen for for the *shakti*. This came to me only when I was thinking why specifically *kecarī*? And, uh, That freedom is not just the freedom to move in space, but the freedom to move in all states in all conditions. And this is what he shows in the case of emotions, etc., which are the phases of the same *Shakti* like *gocaryā*, *vicāryā*, *gocaryā*, but not separated from their source. So, this freedom to move makes not only freedom to move in the sky but freedom to move in all states of consciousness. And he doesn't say, but it is very obvious. And here I want to recommend one book which is not exactly about, but it is very much connected with the topic of this afternoon. Um, "Emotions in Indian Thought Systems." It is completely new, uh, "Emotions in Indian Thought Systems". Because it deals with, normally, emotions are dealt within the context of aesthetics, *navarasa* and all that. But this has been dealt with very extensively by the mysticians. But here, emotions in the thought system and, of course, in the psychology because we don't call it psychology, but it is psychology. Psychology as a part of philosophy of spirituality, whatever you may call it. But it's definitely an analysis of the emotions in Indian thought systems apart from the well-known aesthetic, uh, aspects of emotions. 

Now, if uh, Abhinavagupta has given sixty names of *anuttara*. Here it's not that he gives a number of meanings, that he goes into great detail of what is *kecarī* in practice. So,  And it is already uh this quotation where speaks of *svātantrya shakti*. And uh, exactly, *kecarī* is that *svātantrya shakti* in the freedom. Now, then don't complain that I'm not telling you the page number.  Suddenly nine. We have started. And then it continues, continues, continues. And in Sanskrit also. Because I would always love if we would have the tape her just to go along with the Sanskrit, it is so much clearer And, uh, more beautiful. But that requires another hand in seminar. 

So, in the Sanskrit is that the bottom of this page and on that end for the.

Now, Abhinavagupta makes it very clear. It's always easier for the teacher to first demonstrate the negative side and then the positive. So, the negative, uh, is of the *kecarī samatā* is *kecarī vaiṣamya* is the this harmony of the inequality of with that power of consciousness. 

So, in my book, it is of course page 92 following, etc. 

So, lack of harmony, lack of, uh, balanced, lack of equality with this *vaiṣamyā*. And so on page 39. 

There is where then ask that where the *kecarī* is perceived separately from the divine in the form of desire, anger, etc. Now, Abhinavagupta, by analyzing the both the positive and the negative states in relation to *kecarī*, he gives examples of *kāmakrodhā*, etc. Which are in all the yoga texts are extreme examples for disturbing emotions of *kleśā*. And here he will stick to this version of its *kecarī*.

If it is perceived separately in the form of *kāmakrodhā*, etc. Whether the *samatā* or sameness or harmony of *kecarī* means the perception of a full divine nature everywhere.  The Here he gives a kind of abbreviating statement about what means *vaiṣamyā*, what means *sāmya* or *samatā*. And, uh, that's in he gives all the sense organs in bracket because it is related to all the senses because of our being of the nature of perfect freedom. And here comes the sentence, which is very, very crucial in his translation, but let us see the Sanskrit first.  

right on page 40 on the top in Sanskrit. 

Very brief statement, what is *vaiṣamyā* with the *samatā*. And then he says: What is this inequality? What is this asymmetry?  Even, uh, that is in parenthesis even, *ajñatā* of the ignorance of the nature of the integral *anuttara* amounts to a contrary state of the divine. Now what is this contrary? It is *vaiṣamyā*.  For this inequality or this asymmetry even a the ignorance means the non-recognition 

of the nature *svarūpa* of the *abhikal* partless absolute *avicala*, untainted of the absolute without parts, *abhikal*. And even the slightest portion minimal portion of non-recognition that is the disharmony of the mental modes, *citta-vṛtti*, *mano-vṛtti*. But this is the very important state because this is the root of all evil. *aprajñāna* is, uh, *prajñāna* is *moksha*, is liberation and *aprajñāna* is the non-recognition is the source of trouble is the disharmony. And it is just a lack, complete lack of recognition of the partless nature of the absolute of the *cit*. So even *saṁsāra*, nothing, this is *saṁsāra*. This this *aprajñāna*, this non-recognition, this is *saṁsāra*. And I think, uh, Gaudapada said very rightly that where is the place here of the whole idea of reincarnation and so on. Because then it has to follow your *karma* and the. And it follows its own causal laws. But here it's only question of recognizing your own true nature. All not recognizing. But it's not a question of recognition, it's not that it is absent, it's not given any, uh, place in this system. And then this *saṁsāra* and what the what are this disturbing factors here, the *trimalas* that is in all Śaiva systems. The *trimalas*, *āṇavam*, *māyiyam*, and *karma mala*. Which in the non-dualistic, uh, Śaivism, of course, they are not substantial. They are only part of that ignorance, they they are only due to that ignorance. They're not so substantial that you need, uh, a lot of ritual to purify them. They can be removed by knowledge, by *prajñāna*. And, uh. And here a little bit before the the translation what I just said in this state in this statement of the *vaiṣamya* of this, uh, disharmony there is active display of *āṇavamala* bringing about it does the sense of extremes, either extremely happy, either extremely unhappy. The lack of *pūrṇa*, *apūrṇatva*, the lack of fullness, incompleteness or lack of fullness. *apūrṇarūpa*, *apūrṇa abhimāna*, and it is not actual lack of fullness, but it's only considering oneself you consider yourself incomplete. There is no nobody responsible for that, only you. You you con-conceive your experiences as incomplete. And it is so beautiful the psychology of these *malas* because it is all based on the mind, on ego. There's no external factor responsible. *apūrṇa*, you con-consider yourself as incomplete or as imperfect. And that creates a whole lot of desires, you know? You want to complete what what is missing, so you go and for shopping, and you go buy another car, and having another wife, and God knows what. But this is all, uh, to complete the incompleteness because you are not aware of the fullness which you are. And this is *āṇavamala*, this is most difficult to eradicate. Because, uh, considering or understanding your fullness, that means you all desires will disappear. Because you have everything. So there's no question of, uh, trying to complete what is missing. *apūrṇa-abhimānasvātantrya anutvāt āpādanāt*. Yeah. That of course fullness, he is right in the sense *anutva* means, but it's not smallness, *anutva* means individuality. And that limited a limited individuality, *anutva*. *āṇavamala sya*. That the *pūrṇarūpa*, *paripūrṇa ākāṅkṣayā bhedadarśanāt māyā kena ākṛṣyate*. Then the *māyiyamala* is basically, uh, perception of differences and duality. *bheda*. You see nothing but *bheda* between yourself and others, between, uh, uh spiritual, matter, between, uh, God and, uh, man. It's all perceived, uh, in the sense of difference, *bheda*. This is *māyiyamala*. *bhedadarśanāt*. And *karmamala*. *tat śubha-aśubhavāsanāgraheṇa karmamalasya ca cāpalāsaḥ*. And *karmamala*, which is of course due to *karma*. It is only the of course on the basis of of accumulated *karma* that you dis- differentiate between good and evil and *śubha-aśubha* and and so on. But based on your earlier actions and experiences, etcetera. But the *svarūpa-prajñāna mayā tat vaiṣamyavivṛtau mala-abhāvāt krodha-moha-ādi-dvitīya-paripūrṇa-bhagavat-kailāsa-pratikāraka-saṁvid-ātmanā abhedaḥ, so'ham iti*. But page 40, translation. When owing to the absence of limitation, the *vaiṣamya* in the sense of disharmony of the modes of the mind caused by the non-recognition of essential nature ceases, the varied states of anger, delusion, etcetera appear as only an expression of the consciousness of the perfect revealed Flavor. Is the mike is working? Or it was never working. So the absence of this disharmony and of the *malas*, the same states of *kāma*, *krodha*, *moha*, etcetera. The same states, they are nothing but an expression of the divine consciousness. And here we come this very much connected with, uh, what we have practiced from the beginning of *Advaita* and as well the Kārikā that the the on. It is on page. There even the negative emotions the that even the negative to this divine consciousness or they are aspects of this divine consciousness. When they are not separated from that, uh, *prajñāna*, the self-recognition. And here he gives, uh, a quote of the of the *Spanda Kārikā*. And that quote of course to what he showed us before. Being very angry or being extremely happy and thinking what should I do, being in doubt what to do. Even in these state, the same states, they also partake of the, uh, divine nature. And in, uh, the *jñānapāda* there were several examples for in these emotional states which are partake of the *niṣkalatva* nature. Because the difference between *vaiṣamya* and *samatā* is in the difference between, uh, *savikalpaka* and *nirvikalpaka*. *Savikalpaka* means with the thought, uh, projections and *nirvikalpaka* free from thought projections. And here he quotes some of this very famous frequently quoted, uh, phrases by Śrīramaṇa. I don't have this here explicitly, but this is very, uh, very frequently quoted. *śivāyaḥ*. He who that whose very nature consists in the expansion of His consciousness, that's activity of Shiva. So something is basically *anutva*,  *tṛṣṭi*, *bheda*. And then what is very frequently quoted: "*suka dukhe same kṛtvā sthito'ham iti paramparayā shivaḥ*." Whether in joy or in suffering or in confusion, I have established the Supreme Shiva. And *sukhe* because in a state where there is *sthitaprajñā*, this is very important. And this translation: In pain also the purpose is steadiness through the influence, influence of essential nature by means of indifference towards them. *dukhe*, in suffering. Now, the difference between the same emotions leading to *samatā* or leading to *vaiṣamya*, and that he goes on now to explain. Even the states of anger, etcetera, etcetera, exist because of their identity with the wondrous play of the Divine Consciousness. Otherwise, their very existence would be impossible. The divine position of the nature that *anutva* is in *bheda*. The divine sense of this is themselves carrying out the various play and like the rays of Śiva's sun. Not that the *indriyas* are *karaṇadevatas*. They are not themselves, the *kriyādevatās*, uh, *karaṇadevatas*, the powers, sense powers, and they are like rays of the sun of Shiva. It's a beautiful image. There's a whole different concept of the senses which of course has its participation in the universe and, uh, even what other religions. But, uh, in tantra of course it is fully explained. The *karaṇadevatas*. And as in the case of the *yoginīs* or of the *śaktis* you have those who are positive positive powers and also negative powers. But they become negative only if that lack of recognition is there. And the same powers, they become positive when the recognition of identity with, uh, *anutva* or with the divine consciousness is there. So he goes to that. And the end of page 40: If the real nature of these rays, that is *śakti*, is not realized, then conceiving wonders play of the divine consciousness, which remains in *bheda*, etcetera, etcetera, as the senses or *karaṇadevatas* or as the independent powers of good and evil and so forth, they become on that account the causes of limitations and bondage for those in whom such ignorance prevails.  

taught in page 14. Yes. Even and needs to be done. Each one of these being above this gate or some other liberation and life itself. So, Of course, if he sees by means of the supernatural He sees the Sanskrit. I just I want to go a bit back in the Sanskrit. Page 40 after the quotation *Shiva dreshtin*. So *keter* the because they now. This is a very important expression. "*Khoda adik vikayope chitsahakaradātajñāna anethātatsvarūpa nādarśayativa āyogata*." Those mental states, like anger etc because of *chitsahakaradātajñāna*, because of their unity with the wonder of consciousness. *Chitsahakar*, this is, uh, something surprising, something wonderful. They are that because their unity with the wonder of consciousness. Because otherwise, that *svarūpa*, that that that va-yoga. Otherwise, it would not be possible to attain that true nature, *svarūpalābha*. And you know, *svarūpalābha* and the *tanmātraloka*, *sukshmadrshta* is the very fundamental, very definition of nature. In other places, it's *Moksha* is nothing but attainment of transreality through sorrow. So it is nothing very far-fetched. But essential, very essential. Yeah, then the next page, uh, 50 in Sanskrit. What is everything but this particular. Yeah, this is beautiful, uh, stanza of this *Spanda Kārikā*. When he's found the rootedness and supreme *Spandam*, then bringing the emergence and dissolution of the universe entirely under his control. He becomes a real enjoyer, and transformed the Lord of the collective world of Shiva. Again, I'm very happy with this translation, but "*Yadā tu ekatrasambhūta*", this is very difficult because, "*ekatrasambhūta*" being rooted in one point. "*ekatrasambhūta*" being rooted in one point, that is the one point in us. Yes, after this quotation. *Svarūpa-vijñāna-ucche, yat tāvat deva yadidam shobhādiṣu vr̥ttiṣu udayasamaye yanna vikalpekaikībhūtaṃ, tat svarūpam, vikalpopyudayamānotvam sammohasampradānāt*." So that is it, okay. The point of arising, *udayasamaya*, an-avikalp. At the point of arising these emotions are free from thought. They are pure energy. Just "*ekatra*", "*ekatra*" means concentrated at one point. But the moment they explode, or they go out, then they get, uh, distracted into *vikalpa*. They shall. So until they are all these things are very much connected. The *jñāna-bhairava*, *Spanda Kārikā*, and so on. And then he says for them, "*Na vikalpanubhavat, vikalpa-antarātmā,*" "*Na vikalpanubhavat, vikalpa-antarātmā, "Kevala-samyabev mokṣaḥ*." And the harmony with *Kevala* itself is liberation. "*Kevala-samyabev mokṣaḥ*." And this is very consoling for *yogis*. It says that even if a *yogi* he had that experience of a-*vikalpa* and then he gets, uh, swayed away by emotions or anything. It says that, it cannot annul the yogi's nature determined by his earlier state of *vikalpa*. This is very important because we always think that the negative impressions have more power. Some scholar like Assam argued "*Vairagya sthāvara*." But it's here, it's opposite. It's the positive impressions which cannot be annulled. That's why in the, uh, Kālidāsa in the *Kumārasambhava* says, "*Samādisaṃskāra*." If once you have experienced *samādhi*, that leaves an impression. And that impression will not leave you even if you think you have forgotten or you have been distracted. But that impression remains. So that's a very positive, uh, approach to *saṃskāra*, *saṃskāra*. Because otherwise, we would say poverty can become very, uh, heavy, or you have to be so careful about our feelings and about our actions. Otherwise we are immediately under the, uh, *malas* and so on. But these *samadhi* states of a-*vikalpa*, they cannot be annulled. They cannot disappear. The thought constructs are not entirely detached from the undifferentiated state of consciousness. That's his translation of a-*vikalpa*. Which is only another kind of *vikalpa* or thought. It is only the undifferentiated consciousness near *vikalpa*, which, by the power of its autonomy differentiates from itself the various entities from which are derived the differences of the gross elements known as "*Vijñāna chakra*". And it is thus the master, at the end of the translation says this. On page 50 and Sanskrit. Page 60. 60 in Sanskrit. If you remember, we have discussed, uh, the *Mangala śloka* where it is said "*shobhekṣiṇī yamutalayasya*". But "*nāsādarthika shobha*", it's a positive thing. *Shobha* means agitation. And here because, here he is defending the positive role of emotions. So, *shobha* it would be negative, it would lead to *vairagya*. But otherwise, and that he goes on a whole long development about these, uh, emotions and, uh, he makes it very clear, if somebody is not capable of emotions, even strong emotions, not only he cannot be an artist because his *saṃvedanā* is not there. But even spiritually, he cannot, uh, experience anything. So, this is very astounding. The emotions are absolutely necessary. But the emotions have to be connected with that *svarūpa*, with that, uh, harmony with that fundamental consciousness. And so then *shobha* is Without *shobha* there's no emotion. *Shobha* means some agitation, whether they are good or bad, positive, delightful or or negative or So there is some *shobha*. And in this book I have I have something about the positive role of *shobha* in intensity of emotions. And the *shobha*, then ultimately, it is also related to creation. Because and this is in the Tantras or in the Shiva Tantra, for example, where Shiva would not create unless Shakti would put some *shobha*. She would push him. So that *shobha* is a creative push, a creative urge. Otherwise, everything would be there would be no activity or creativity at. But then *shobha* has to be in the right perspective. Unity consciousness. "*Ekaikayaiva*", "*kenaiba charūparādyaṃ*." 

Somebody will speak to. And then the better topic of yoga takes to an analysis of the sexuality. This very 42-43 translation. And practices based on the unity of page 42 on the the *jñāna* which is the union of *śiva* and *śakti*. So here therefore harmony with the *cit śakti* constitutes liberation. This harmony and translate on top of the *cit śakti* is due to the awareness of the essential nature of the *ātmā* which is constantly present and which arises from the place of the recognition of the completion of the union of the divine *śakti* and *śiva* and acquires stability by the realization of the consciousness of bliss of both. So this is the basis for this: the importance of the emotional dynamism which has its most expressed form, of course, in sexuality. And the sexual power which then leads. It's not only limited to sexuality leads to creativity in all fields. Numerous Śiva intent on creativity in the form of expansion by means of the energy of the great mantra of the supreme primal word, that means the perfect I in union with *śakti* in whom the I consciousness implicit and in whom above bursts the bloom of the compactness of the energy becomes engaged in the act of creative expansion. This is actually this other. Yes page 16 9 5-7 *viriya*, *virya śakti*, *viriya śakti samaya trenā abhinnaś ca api ādeśa kāla kalita spanda spanda maya mahā vimarsha rūpam iva paripūrṇam eva samvit ātmakam svātantraya māna svā svātantra ānanda śaktimayam sukha rasa rūpam*. So this is this is the very basis of this central emotion of com based on the union of *śiva* and *śakti*. And then it goes into kind of psychosomatic analysis. Now what then enters the inner psychic apparatus or the outer senses of all beings that invites a serpent life energy *caitanya rūpeṇa prāṇa rūpam*. In the middle channel that is in *suṣumna* whose main characteristic is to enliven all the parts of the body that life energy is said to be *ojas*. *Ojas* is that you arrive to last in the not that translation that is then diffused as an enlivening factor in the form of common sense energy. Now, *virya* often translated as sexual energy because it sounds very masculine, but it is definitely not limited to the, uh, here it sounds, uh, as if it is only limited to female in all parts of the body but definitely relates to both sexes. Then when an exciting visual or auditory perception enters the percipient, then on account of its exciting power it fans the flame of passion in the form of agitation of the sexual power *virya*. Now here we can begin we have the psychological basis for your aesthetics. Because without emotional basis of course there can be no aesthetic transformation of the aesthetic, yes. And then of the forms sound etc. It's all the sense organs, the sense perceptions, even a single one because of its being made powerful by the augmented vigor augmented vigor if I refer to previous it can bring about the excitement of the senses pertaining to all other objects also. Since everything is implicit of all these from now. Here this is one maxim which has come, uh, before and it will come extensively several times after. Everything is connected with everything else. And it comes in all kinds of contexts in the cosmology, here in psychology in, uh, of course in in spiritual experience. Everything is connected with everything else, or every every every detail is connected with the whole. That's a different translation of the. So also in the case of this psychosomatic, uh, experience of the sense sense perceptions. Everything is connected with an epitome of all things, *sarvam sarvatmakam* for all people. Even memory or an idea of a thing can truly bring about agitation because of the excitement of innumerable kinds of experiences like sound, etcetera, like subconsciously in the unconscious mind. This is a whole big packet of psychology because we have collected this whole many memories of, uh, sense perceptions. And then, um, then the the memory itself can also produce the same as a direct perception. And there are two examples in the vignette one is cited in terms of this, uh, memory page 43. When the vital energy that has been lying within identical with oneself in the placid state is agitated through love, that is when it is in an active state, then the source of its pleasure is the supreme I consciousness. Full of creative pulsation beyond the range of space and time. *ādeśa kāla kalita spanda maya mahā vimarsha rūpam iva*. Of the nature of perfect I consciousness the absolute sovereignty full of the power of bliss that that's what they have before in Sanskrit and So the the foundation for every emotional, every sense perception is the *pūrṇahan* power. Now *pūrṇahan* the the divine I consciousness. That is the source for all these springs all the energies. And then they become either negative or positive depending on our capacity to remain in that harmony with the *cit* or if we are detached, uh, and then we fall prey of the lower powers, the lower *tamasic* etc. And that is end of 43 and if you somebody sense perception excessive delight is possible only to those whose heart is expanded by similar energy which has the boundless capacity to strengthen sensibility, *sativetā*, and which is established in them by the repeated association with objects of enjoyment. So it's not a yoga where you have to exclude all objects of enjoyment. But on the contrary, you have to experience. So this again is for aesthetics and this is *sativetā*. *sati-* this *sativetā* that is sensibility which is both aesthetic and spiritual, *sativetā*. And, uh, in the tantra literature also they emphasize those who cannot have any experience of beauty there after there, uh, they cannot even experience the divine. They they are not capable of any spiritual experience, *sativetā*. Their heart is. And then of course one cannot be stable it's good with beautiful experiences and everything is beautiful and whatever ugly painful experiences. So in grief also there is the same boundless experience of delight practically for those who have *cit śakti*. Whatever pleasure is derived from one's wife and son, the pleasure which is animated by similar energy which abides in the heart when, contrary to all anticipation, there is an apprehension of the loss of the loved one aroused by tears and griefs, that very pleasure becomes the cause of grief, *śoka*. And when that grief reaches its climax and one thinks that the pleasure will not be experienced any more any longer, then owing to despair the nature of that grief is suddenly turned into distinct joy. This is very subtle, uh, psychological observation. Because one cannot remain in sorrow for a long time and and it is that is a point where it is turned into something joyful. I think everybody must have experienced that this type of experience. This is very somewhat clear. Going to the expansion of the essential nature of *cit śakti*. And then again it goes, uh, *samananda* even in grief by the expansion of the essential nature because and that is in the vignette there that is that, uh, that inner about about paper about grief *śoka*, *śoka*. And the result is that in grief then facing death and facing very terrible situation. There is a moment of expansion of some *śoka vikāsa* and that is what, uh, *samananda* always is spoken of. Because there's so much actuality. One of the reasons is one-pointedness. Because when you get the news of the death of the beloved person, it becomes so one-pointed everything else disappears. And that one-pointedness is such a power. So that is because of consciousness. So there is the transformation transformation of the painful experiences into a pure bliss you can call this way. This is very. 

And this is, uh, after this quotation of *cid rūpa triśīrṣṇi bhedas trikaṃśāṃ gataḥ yadā bhedas trikaṃśā gatā yadā sakalena priya nāḍi bhūtaṃ na ho tare paripūrṇaṃ tu mahā madhyama sauṣumnā padāṃ praviśe nitya śakti śubhatā tadā jñaṃ tat padatite tadā sarvatā dvita kalane paripūrṇaṃ sva śakti para- diparśa aham tā ahamtāṃ maya camatkāraṃ anupraveśe paripūrṇa sṛṣṭi ānanda rūpa rudrayāmala yoga anuveśena tan mahānta eve yo visarga viśleṣaṇāt tṛpti rūpasya tadā sarvatā dvita kalane* because what happens in that moment is the dissolution of duality. Suddenly you are thrown into into the oneness into the there's nothing else but that suffering or that joy whatever it is, complete unity of the emotions. And and in the yogic, uh, physiology it means entering into *suṣumṇa* that the the *vaiśya prāṇa apāna* it it enters into *suṣumṇa*. Here where when there is a dissolution of *prāṇa* and *apāna*, *prāṇa* in *suṣumṇa*, which as the central channel is full of the storage of the energy of all the senses, then one's consciousness has been through into the state of the great central *suṣumṇa* channel where because union with the pulsation of one's *akti* then all sense of duality dissolves. And this is the whole crux. And all sense of duality dissolves. And then all sense of duality dissolves that means *vaiṣamya* visolved then this very bitter separation from the center of consciousness then so *dvita kalane*. All sense of duality dissolves and there is the perfect high consciousness generated by the abundance of the perfection of one's own inherent *shakti*. Then by one's entry into the union of Shiva and Shakti, *rudrayāmala yoga anuveśena*, that auspicious state which consists in the bliss of the essential nature of manifestation by one's complete integration with the expansive flow of the energy of the great mantra of perfect high consciousness. There is the manifestation of the ocular wonder, absolute power nature which is beyond all differentiation, unutterable and eternal. These are paragraphs, it is not sufficient to just read, you have to go back to it again and again and meditate on it and see. These are very long sentences and the translation is also very long but what it brought implies is tremendous is tremendous power. How he connects that union of *Shiva* and *Shakti* with the sense perception with the emotions and the the the *vikalpa* and *nirvikalpa* state with the same emotions which can be experienced in *vikalpa* or *nirvikalpa*. So these are passages you just market them you go home and read it again and again again. And see what it all implies. It's very. But you know generally when one speaks of sex, but in the case of for sex is sustained by the polarity of the seminal energy that in bodies effects joy of a sudden in the central channel induced by the excitement of the seminal energy in then loosing out at the moment of trait is a matter of personal experience where this joy this joy is not simply dependent on the body which is merely a fabricated thing. This is spirit. Because the illusion of people generally is it's only physical, but it's not dependent on it. That's why it is derived from that whole energy of Shiva Shakti. If in such a moment itself is a token of remembrance of the inherent delight of the divine self that *advitīya anupadesha bāhyam asau*, they were the sensual experience can be a reminder of the recognition of the Self. This is tremendous. My consciousness gets entry in the eternal unutterable state that is realized by means of the harmonious union with the expansive energy of the perfect high consciousness which constitutes the unutterable divine *Shakti*, *parā prakāśa rūpe*, who is an expression expression of the absolutely free manifestation of the bliss of the union of *Shiva* and *Shakti* denoting the Supreme Brahman. It will be said later on, one should worship the greatest aspect of the perfect high consciousness that is in *Para Shiva*. We are coming to the end of this *chitrayi samatā*. And then he quotes practical two verses before verses number this very powerful one *yathānyag bhūta bhedas tat* as the seed of the banyan tree. *yatha anya bhūta bhedas tat shakti rūpa mahātmā tataḥ vibhedas taj jagad bhedas taj jada jātaṃ*. This is a very powerful verse. Thus as a seed because it's all about that creative power of Shiva. And this creative power is compared to the seed of a banyan tree which is so tiny and yet it results in a powerful expansion as the tree. Apart from the fact that *bīja* refers to the *mantra*, but that is not intended here. And that *yathānya bhūta bhedas tat shakti rūpa mahātmā tataḥ*. Tree is contained potency in that seed of the banyan tree. And then he quotes the very last verse 88 of *Rudrayāmala*. We have seen either this morning or yesterday that when *abheda rūpa* gets the two points which make the whole matter very transparent.

The *dvau vāca eko deśa* as *dvau vāca eko deśa* as it is applicable to *Rudrayāmala* when they are united at the end. So there's just two points. And it is applicable to *Rudrayāmala* it quotes in here. This is the result of the process of the integration of the harmonious integration of *Shiva* and *Shakti* which is *chitrini samatā*, *chitrini samatā*. He stops himself. He wants so much other He talks so much. So I must stop him. Death for the six the question of the baby in Amṛteśvara concerning whether the two are different Ananda was put to Prabhudeva from the standpoint of *mahat* and *antarāla* and then finally from *para samvit*. Why? Because that *Rudrayāmala* the union of *Shiva* and *Shakti* has been demonstrated also at the lower levels. What it makes at the lower levels of the human, but connected not separated from *Para Shiva*. And therefore this harmony introduction to the disappearing teachings of Trika scripture. So according to the principles set forth about this is what is meant by the first verse, that is *anuttara* which gives *kaula siddhi* and which if understood brings about *chitrini samatā*. This is, uh, just like you listen to his, um, he tries to stop himself. Alas that alas. *Amṛteśvara trika śāstra rahasya upadeśa kartaḥ tat paśyati tat paśyati tāve tat vibhāvām anuttarāṃ kaulika siddhi kāṃ yena yena jñātam yena jñātam yena chit samvit tata uttamam*. So he summarizes the whole commentary on the first verse question of the baby which we have been going so far for the last three or four days, um, only this, but it contains so much. It contains so much. If you go back to all those passages which are very dense like the one we have read today. How he connects that matter of the union with the emotions and all the rest of sense perception. *Gita* tomorrow we come to the second part of the question of the baby. But we will not be so long as the first time. There is no show. Okay, that tomorrow we come to the second part of the question of the baby. 

