Vimatalāśrayā viśva-sṛṣṭi-mahājananī Vimatalāśrayā viśva-sṛṣṭi-mahājananī Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha-kṛta-ruci-janakāḥ Bharitatnuśca pañcamukha-kṛta-ruci-janakāḥ Tadupāyayā malaṃ sphuṭitvā viśvargam ayam Tadupāyayā malaṃ sphuṭitvā viśvargam ayam Hṛdayaṃ antarārāṃṛta-kūlaṃ mama saṃspṛśāt Hṛdayaṃ antarārāṃṛta-kūlaṃ mama saṃspṛśāt Tadupāyayā malaṃ sphuṭitvā viśvargam ayam Tadupāyayā malaṃ sphuṭitvā viśvargam ayam Hṛdayaṃ antarārāṃṛta-kūlaṃ mama saṃspṛśāt Hṛdayaṃ antarārāṃṛta-kūlaṃ mama saṃspṛśāt 

Śrī Devī-vākyam Anuttarāṃ gatham devāṃ satya-kautīka-siddham Enāṃ vijñāta-mātrāṃ khedinī samatāṃ vrajet Etadguriyam mahāguriyam kareyasvāṃ mahāprabhoḥ Hṛdayasthā-dvitīyā-śaktiḥ kautīka-kula-nāyikā Tāṃ ekā kathya deveśo yena triptiṃ labhāmyaham 

Śrī Bhairava-vākyam Śrīṃ Devī mahā-bhaye uttarasya-pyanuttarāṃ Kautīkuyam vividhevi mahad-bhāvanya vasthitāḥ Kareyāmi sureśāni satya-kautīka-siddham Athā

Saṃjñāna - saṃjñāna, intuitive gnosis, meditative reflection. 

And because the whole revelation has been realized by the saṃjñāna, so that's why you said you don't need ritual, you don't need yoga. 

And the other indication is that it is accessible to all kinds of people. It has no limitation in adhikara. Because what's gnosis is open to to everybody. It is not limited neither to a particular initiation or caste or whatever, nothing, completely open. But saṃjñāna is that which gives you the intuitive insight into whatever is revealed in this.

And of course the general ritual and yoga is has very little role here in the sense of making an effort to achieve. But they both notices saṃjñāna. Saṃjñāna is something like the jñāna in vidyā jñāna, for example, because mystical knowledge, intuitive inside, etc.

Now we have thought yesterday... That we... What that dawned that you are using... What that dawned you are using... Prasaṃjñāna, this is my word which when I put here... It's a ... It's a very powerful key, I think, but... You couldn't hear before? It was a bit difficult, we were sitting here.

The very start yesterday was that the sutras because we have only two sessions. Uh, it is most difficult for for me to select for this conclusion. And I'm not taking this satisfactorily. 

But uh, so far we have been proceeding step-by-step. And we have been basically clarifying those several terms and the *kaula-dvitīya* and the *kṣetrajña*, etcetera. But uh, then, then we come to the... the answer of Abhinavagupta. And his answer, he says, _Uttarasya-pyanuttaram_. Of course both in the question of the Devī, the second part, and the the answer of Abhinavagupta, the word *uttara* is most central, and uh, that also becomes not completely uh, subject of today which we'll try this morning and afternoon we'll try to complete these important subjects. But it comes here in the... it's not just only one place.

_Uttarasya-pyanuttaram_, it starts uh, page 76 and continues with uh, 78.

Now, what he says is not uh, very complex, at least at the first. And... The first section was devoted to *anuttara*, and then the second to *uttara*, but *uttara* in relation to *anuttara*, and there is this... there is no break, but there's just two phases: one stresses the absolute aspect and the other the integration of that *anuttara* into the *uttara* where it explicitly uh, very... this terminology is not taken absolutely literally, but it gives different uh, sensations of *uttara*, including the aim. Of course, this is the main answer where he says that even in the second part of the text, there is no answer to the question... let's, let's, like when you're clear, but the question is more important, there is no answer even in the second part. So this is a tremendous statement, you know, that whether we... what do we know, how much can we intuitively understand if this... there is no answer. But we have to again and again ask the question. So he gives different meanings, and I'll just try to select the most pertinent passages.

Yeah, this is what he says here on page 76. Uh, first, he he gives a general thesis. This is a difficult verse, let us go to 28 in the Sanskrit. It got the very... This was which is not by Abhinavagupta but, but this from *Samvitprakāśa:* " *param vyavasthāpi pare yāvat nātmī kṛta parā tāvat na śakyate kartuṃ yato bhukta paraṃ pare* ". *Samvitprakāśa* 23, he says, "Even the assertion of difference cannot be made in the different objects so long as the Supreme is not assimilated to oneself." _Yāvat parā nātmī kṛta parā_, *"atmi"*, to integrate, to integrate into yourself. It's not... it's not something objective outside, but that you are to make yours, to make yours, or there are different expressions, *"hṛdaya padma"*, to to absorb in the heart, absorption, the heart absorption of this. 

_Yāvat nātmī kṛta parā param vyavasthāpi pare yāvat nātmī kṛta parā_. As long as the Supreme Reality is not absorbed in yourself, you can't understand even the relative. This is the main locus here. _Tāvat_, since the different object is known or is realized only in the Supreme, and then this is the kind of the... the answer, it's a very *uttara*-centric *anuttara*. Then even that relative has to be seen in the light of the Absolute, has to be experienced or realized, *para vyākhyāna*, it would be very non-stick. Reality is in the light of the Absolute. 

And then he says, "*Uttara* may be understood literally." _Uttarasya paran mukhya uttara_, meaning even the posterior part of the book cannot offer the answer. Not, not very explicitly, but he goes on. He goes on about this uh, not discarding it totally. *Uttara* may also mean the phenomenal. So it's rather relative, this is a level of normal human actions prompted by the triad of *icchā-śakti, jñāna-śakti, kriyā-śakti*. *Anuttara* is that state where all that path and *uttara* ceases. Now it ceases, but this that is *viśrānti*, *viśrānti* is calm, where they find the... it poses a special kind of... because calm is not the Absolute. And then what he keeps balance, that's why uh, uh, to give importance to this word passage because the the great maxim which is pervading the entire text Commentary is *sarvaṃ sarvātmakaṃ*. So how everything is related to the totality or everything part contains the whole, etcetera, etcetera. So this is where we see that everything of the sides because in some other text, he again uh, on the basis of that verse from the *Mahābhārata*, he does this exercise of going through the whole of reality as in all the grammatical cases: *anukrati*, ablative, ablative to uh, the instrumental, etcetera, but everything comes from bliss, everything is contained.

So on page 77 now *anuttara* is that from which proceeds this great manifestation, this *mahasrishti* which enfolds within itself hundreds of crores of undifferentiated phenomena, *māyā prakṛtis*, as has been stated from which proceeds everything, *yatassarvam*. So this universe consisting of the different levels of *pramatta* sensory experience, pleasure and pain that subjective experiences, senses and means of experience, the five elements and *jāla*, etcetera, the subtle and gross objects of experience, abide without difference in one Absolute divine Consciousness, a simply form of Consciousness, *bhūtātmikā anubhava*. The whole divine universe of Consciousness never ceases to exist, or it's ceasing thereby leading to the absurdity of universal darkness. Yet there does not exist difference consisting of reciprocal absence of objects, for all objects are only failures in that state. *Viśrāntim ānayet evam upajāpaḥ*. If all things were not situated in that universe of higher Consciousness, then even the initiation in the form of perception, which is infused by urging the senses towards the objects, would not be there. Therefore the entire multitude of existents exist there. But how the appearance of the group of objectivity identically with I-consciousness only void of all differentiation? There is absolutely no difference there between that bracket, the universe of higher Consciousness. The entire manifestation lies clearly... in this manifestation is here a translation of *Kālikā* commentary.

So this is uh, they're derived from *yatassarvam*, from who, from which everything proceeds, and therefore everything is connected with that source, that totality from where it uh, proceeds. *Mahasrishti*, as he says, is the great creation in which all the multitude of so many creations, dissolutions, and re- uh, recreations, etcetera, they all form that *Mahasrishti*. So they completely because of the... The page 29 in Sanskrit.

Then in the locative, *yasmin sarvam*, in which all things exist. All this universe consisting of 36 *tattvas*, though created by Śiva, who being of Supreme *Śakti*, is of the nature of universal creative pulsation, *samānya-spanda*... I think this is known to most of you, the universal vibration, rests in that Consciousness itself in its own form, which is predominantly *Śakti*, that is characterized by a particular creative pulsation. This is his form, and this is a helpful uh, concept here, the *samānya* and *viśeṣa*. So they are related this, how the universal Consciousness and the multitude of manifestations, they are connected in as concrete manifestations, part of the universe uh, for the bliss Consciousness. So this is an on the basis of *yasmin sarvam*, in whom or in which all things exist. 

This multitude of objects of the nature of Śiva and *Śakti*, Śiva who is *samānya-spanda* and *Śakti* who is *viśiṣṭa-śaktiśālī*, *viśeṣa-spanda*, though only of one form, therefore, one, one, *ekātmya* also, he vehemently rejects... the Lord only is an epithet for Śiva, but really speaking, he is only one that is *anuttara*, who is the essence of the creative energy, is the autonomous I-consciousness. So he brings it back to the... the source with this *ahaṃ abhāgena eva bhūtātmikā rūpeṇa asti*. 

Now this... because uh, the method of Abhinavagupta is always grammatical because then this was all the cases are included, so the relationship of the *uttara* to the *anuttara* relates to all possible grammatical cases: locative, ablative uh, instrumental, and of course, nominative and uh, and the genitive qualities. Is so the *prati-yath* of *yatassarvam, yatas sarvam*, or *yasmin sarvam*, or *yasmat* different forms come this the sense in all cases on account of its intimate relation with *anuttara sindūraḥ*. The Supreme Śiva in whom it rests. It means the whole reality. This is the clear direction that it is the source of the expansion of universal manifestation, *Kālikaḥ sṛṣṭi prasarā* in the sense of the ablative case *yasmat kṛtam* or *yatassarvam*, that which abides in the ether of my heart in the sense of the locative case *yasmin sarvam visṛtaḥ*, then we leave is *anuttara*. Then very... Then he says, "*Uttara* may be understood literally." _Uttarasya paran mukhya_, meaning even the posterior part of the book cannot offer the answer. Not, not very explicitly, but he goes on. He goes on about this uh, not discarding it totally. *Uttara* may also mean the phenomenal. So it's rather relative. This is a level of normal human actions prompted by the triad of *icchā-śakti, jñāna-śakti, kriyā-śakti*. 


aspect of expansion is *aum*. That is *aumkara*. Even in this regular succession of the external expansion of the system of *Prakriti*, the *Brahma* denoting *parā-śakti* and *Vaiṣṇavī* denoting *apara-śakti*, its unbroken continuity is the highest truth. *Kātyāyanī* means I am expressing it by the use of appropriate names. The series of utterances up to *Vaikharī* that arise from the venerable *parā-śakti* and are expressed in various scriptures in various forms... this principle who is everywhere. Yeah. So 

And then he quotes also another uh, at this meaning of the revealing that the *anuttara* a bit, which is the divine... bases... that by which the being... so there is the true nature of *Kaulika* is fixed and corroborated with its perfect fulfillment is *anuttara*, is the true fulfillment of *Kauliki-kriti*, the creative process.

Then he goes into the... here the different hierarchies of the systems, the traditions. For hinder, for the *Anuttara* comes the highest, and then he gives the different... But this not a disposition from the uh, tantric Shaiva Shastra. The Shaiva system is higher than the Vaishnava, the left hand is higher than the Shaiva, the right-hand doctrine is higher than left, the *Kaula* system is higher than the right hand and *Matta* is higher than *Kaula*. The *Trika* is higher even than *Matta*. The *Trika* is the highest of all. And therefore... and the *Mishra Shaiva* and the Shaiva. 

So he comes to the end of this śloka from the *Mahābhārata*. Thus my *svabhāva-man-manaḥ*. Thus my *svabhāva-man-manaḥ*. Who here is eternally alone, to him alone pervades from... to all. The *svabhāva-man*, and this gives him the basis for his *saṃsāra-chakra*, because Shiva or the *anuttara* itself is *svabhāva*. It is the pervading entity in all kinds of relationships grammatically in all the cases. Therefore to that absolute to that *anuttara* by the... by my processes, who contains everything. And that is a beautiful conclusion.

So all this is very interesting proclaiming this as the central point of his thesis, venerable Abhinavagupta is saying this commentary *Tantrāloka*. What occasion is therefore much talk? Everything is *anuttara* because of being *anuttara*. We will see... one that last week... This difficulty for some... another that he's very direct in his uh... he doesn't make any long uh, explanation, and uh, he just goes directly and without any detour. And if you have not proper uh, *Shaiva Shaiva Shaktīshtika*, then it becomes very difficult, very mystical, and very sharp. So he has this very sharp expressions uh, uh, which are much more softer in the case of uh, *Kuladīpikā* and then... But this work really... it's really fantastic. 

Now there is a footnote. Also, this is Shiva Shaivism. So everything is *anuttara* because *anuttaratvāt*, because of being *anuttara*. So is it a tautology? But what is... is everything? It is *anuttara*, but even Abhinavagupta uses this way of explanation, and it's very, and uh, so... 

This is kind of summary he gives with two kind of summary of this *anuttara* because the use of the word *anuttara* in one of the apostles is the question that in Shiva has been put in *kriyā-śakti, parā-śakti*, the question that in *jñāna-śakti*. And that part of the book which contains the answer should maybe *uttara-śakti, pramāṇa-tantra*. The explanation of this lesson about *uttara*, that is the expansion of Shiva in... also about *anuttara*, the expansion of Shiva. In this case, if the explanation is from the point of view of *Trika*, there arises the contingency of a third question regarding *anuttara*. If the explanation is from the point of view of *Yamala*, even then there is not too separate a principle in Shiva-*śakti* whose connection is known as *Yamala* so that a separate question about each would be justified. Now the third *nada*, it is of course contained in *uttara*. So there is a lot of *nada*, but *nada* always related to *anuttara* usually.

So this is the end... This is the end of the first section of that is this uh, the *Bimba* part of *Tantrāloka*. The two parts are very unequal: the *Bimba* part and the *Pratibimba* part. And the *Bimba* part has been so far treated. That means the *Bimba* means the origin from ancient times. And *Pratibimba* is the manifestation, reflection in uh, uh, in practice, in ritual, and in uh, theory in ritual and objective uh, manifestation. 

And then the... what is the *Kaulika* mode of manifestation, how does it proceed from *anuttara*? Uh, this is the question which is asked and answered in the second part. And again he uh, mentions the method, the method which is universally applied and consisting in three parts. One is the *yukti, āgama* and *svasaṃvedana*. And this is very universal because *yukti* means reflection or discrimination or also teaching reaching, teaching of the guru. Understanding of the knowledge of reality which that is the essence of the world. This an explanation of the *vyuha yukti*. Teaching of the traditional scripture *āgama* and personal experience *svasaṃvedana*. And this is so important that in the whole tradition there is no knowledge without personal experience. So this *svasaṃvedana*... and the three are complementary. And if you, you have those an experience and you, you don't know how, what it means, you go to the *āgama*, or you go to the *yukti*, and then you combine the three, then it becomes some really solid uh, solid realization. But without *svasaṃvedana*, the guru may tell you something, but it will remain an abstract entity for you. So you're on receiving, you're on understanding, you're on realization of practice. This most essential. 

Now actually here starts the whole section on... *mantra*, but we cannot go into this because either we do it thoroughly or it can just touch it. So this I have to leave out, and I highly recommend this book by John Woodroffe where it helps a lot to understand the... the text apart from the translation. And, and the revelation of the *mantra*. And in the afternoon, I want to go to the last... one last verses of the *Tantraloka* and uh, which also relate to the *mantra* but indirectly referring to it. 

So we come now to the... back to the topic of the **heart**. So both in the question of the deity and in the answer of Abhinavagupta... and the **heart** is the uh... defined in very fundamental terms. 

Like uh, uh, higher... I've said uh, Abhinavagupta says... creation and maintenance and state. I mean the... the three *kriya* of *Iśvara: sṛṣṭi, sthiti, saṃhāra*, that is creation, *status quo*, and destruction. This is the rhythm of all the traditions. That which is my **heart**... because Abhinavagupta, "That you will be in the space of my **heart**. This the locus, the foundation, the functioning, the abode of all existing things." That is the definition. _Sarvabhāvānāṃ sthanam pratiṣṭhā ca_. That's why the function, the abode. *Kāma* is... *Kāma* is the abode. The luminous abode of the deities. *Pratiṣṭhā-kāma*, the foundational luminous abode of all existing things. Now *Kāma*, of course, has both meanings.


Of things and states, also the emotions of the **heart**, also the sense of states. Now here, if you get at the **heart** of Śabara's own understanding, the understanding, then you find... it's on which state level that you are doing that... In my... in my case, it is a bit higher than 16. And the translation... Yeah, because I've been looking at... himself, he comes after this first version... version of the text, he comes back to the answer of Śaiva, but Maṇḍana Miśra objected. Because then it amounts as if this absolute power, it is as that is then in the space of Maya. So that being established finally, it follows thereby fully grounded and rooted in the... in the universal **heart**. But here we have given a quotation from Madhava about the feature of *cit* in the... and I will look at this. 

So this universe as is a reflection in the Lord, in the perfectly reflective void of pure consciousness. And arises under the influence of something outside their consciousness. This ability of the Lord to embody himself as the universe without drawing anything outside his own nature is the supreme goddess of our masters called creativity, *śakti*, power. The feminine ultimate... with this supreme power of universality called *icchāśakti*. So all our terms come together. The ability of this deity who as Śaiva embodied in the *śakti* and embodied in some... actuality, to manifest the universe to transcend in actuality. The power with which the Lord is ever one. The power of this... is the combination of these two... The transcendent embrace of the blissful universe is reflected into consciousness. This is the ultimate reality beyond both the universe transcending and the universality. *sarvaparaṭ  param tattvam*. It is the goddess being the essence and the **heart**. So this whole way, you can connect all the dots which we had so far from the beginning landing in the **heart**. And a similar process is found. Yeah, it is the highest power... the womb state of absolute potential. Now, this is... translation. 

Now, this power... This is a very subtle theory which combines practically the... the... But since we are not going to the one language speculation that's difficult to... This Śiva already *utpaladeva* and this particular *kārikā*, he also develops the whole... some of the central... of passages of the whole *kārikās*. Which terminate in the **heart**. So the **heart** is here very much a... both the receptacle of everything. And this... and then the... I don't want to read the whole chapter 20. I've quoted it from the translation. It starts from consciousness. Consciousness pauses its essential nature, reflective awareness, *prakāśa vimarsha*. It is the supreme warmth of our **heart** that arises freely. It is fed on the absolute sense because the sovereignty of the supreme self. And I leave them... It is the luminous, vibrating support of the absolute being *mahasattā*, unmodified by space and time. It is that which is said to be the **heart** of the Supreme Lord, in so far as it is his essence. This a very powerful central passage of *Kārikās*. It connecting the *para* with the absolutely *mahasattā*. Which is of course like under the... and beyond space and time. And it is that that you said to be the **heart** of the Supreme Lord, in so far as it is his essence. And then it is by nature luminous and vibrating. See **heart**, why **heart**? There are so many symbolic implications from symbolic part from pulsating. So the pulsation which is of course again *spanda*. And the *spanda* that the *spandana*. Luminous vibrating, this is the object of this luminous vibrating. It also the very knowledge. It is existence be the subject of the action of being... Because after space and time, it is the power of the activity of consciousness whose essence is reflective awareness. So the *prakāśa* and *vimarsha*. It constitutes the foundation of the self of the Supreme Lord with all things. The various *āgamas* call it **heart**. So whether it is such a basic term which can neither be reduced to... of course not the physical, not the emotional, and not the any limited level of... but it is consciousness. But if you take the term of consciousness like some entity that I hear... they really abstract. But **heart**, you can connect from all aspects: also emotional, also spiritual center. If it had also the... If it is consciousness alone, it may be something very, very abstract. But everything... everything lands in that substratum, in that luminous domain of the **heart**. That has a much more, much more richer than appealing also implication. So no wonder that both in the second question of the deity and in various answer that there place an important role. 

And coming to page 91-92 in the translation. 

Yeah, because into the whole question of interpretation of... of the *mantra*. And these states are from to different places, but here very clearly that the... the interpretation of... of the *mantras*... of the *mantra*... Uh, subtle difference of meaning of the *mantra* depending on imaginary and symbolic interpretation of the letters of the word maybe refuse to some and cannot be refused to pupils of all countries and all times. Now, what is his... his aim is to give his commentary a universally... universally acceptable and to... to everybody. These Germaneness is asserted in his uh, reports and other places also he said this is not limited by any gospel of sectarian validity is open to everyone. 

And coming to page 91-92 in the reading all the verses of the *tantra*, but they're not for immediate use. 

Yeah because into the whole question of interpretation of uh, of the *mantra*. And these states are from to different places, but here very clearly that... that and the interpretation of... of the *mantras*, of the *mantra*. Uh, subtle difference of meaning of the *mantra* depending on imaginary and symbolic interpretation of the letters of the word maybe refuse to some and cannot be refused to pupils of all countries and all times. Now what is his... his aim is to give his commentary a universally... universally acceptable and to to everybody. These Germaneness is asserted in his uh, reports and other places also. He said this is not limited by any gospel of sectarian validity is open to everyone.

_Atha tālakaḥ praśnaś cīvarṇakaḥ atah tālakaḥ purṣaktiḥ apa tālakavṛttiḥ śānaniṣṭhāniṣpanneṣu abhiniveśāt saṁjñā bhavati._ The highest truth without any limitation naturally is suddenly resorted to by those who are established in intense awareness of that state, who are purified to the utmost grace... Yesterday, I talked about the difference of *āruhatā* and *atipātaḥ*... ah, *āruhatā* and *atipātai*. At the beginning also we said that those who are qualified for this teaching, they have to be purified by grace, *śaktipātaḥ*, purified. That... so this is very clear the difference to any yogic or ritualistic discipline of purification has to happen by ritual by yoga by initiation, etc. But here, purification comes by grace. This... this is... it's again it becomes abstract and those who have not experienced it for themselves will tend to not believe in that. That will be completely ground down. That is not important by grinding on the grindstone of continuous spiritual discipline is to be daily practice... and because I mentioned several places this, on the one hand, everything depends on grace. And so grace only which makes you keep a receiver, makes you purifies you from all limitations, and this... But that doesn't mean that we should not practice. The... some people, when he says also... I don't know if I can find this... yeah, he says, "Well, if I said that everything depends on grace, don't stretch your later lie." It is very ah, very colloquial kind of, you know, "Don't just stretch your legs and lie, you know, simply that the divine will do everything for me. I have nothing to do with this." No, you have to practice every day, find a balance. This is very... but all the negative thoughts, etc., are ground down by grinding on the grindstone of continuous spiritual discipline.

_Apyāsakramāc chā śānaniṣṭhā niṣpanneṣu niṣṭhā peśitaḥ_. The... that image of grinding on the grindstone, that is something very solid, solid practice. Not just say, "Oh, well, *śaktipāta* will come when it comes. If it doesn't come, what can I do?" No. There is a lot to be done. Grinding on the grindstone even in the case of those who are still beset by doubts their own initial stage of consciousness appears on several occasions. When they are able to view reality in a slightly limited form too, not in its full natural form as we had this quotation maybe yesterday, but that ocean of bliss of which we get only one drop, they look from that order *sāgaraḥ*. So even... even if you get that drop, you should be very happy, very full. The... that fullness is not... it's not possible because fullness would mean liberation, *śaktipāta* in a book as he says, that means you are going to die. You can't bear it. The intensity of *śaktipātaḥ* leads to death. So it's better to have a little bit less than to really a *jīvanmuktaḥ*. *Jīvanmukta* needs a lot of grace, but not that much grace which cannot be held in the body. The body cannot be... 

So in between, we make such references to... to practice and the relationship between grace and... and practice. I'll find it other places where he speaks about the stretching legs. On page 188 uh, the very kind of sense of humor... Is it starts with if... if you say that God's will is perfect, it is... 

