## Namaḥkāra

After a poetic and mystical introduction by way of the introductory verses or *maṅgalaślokas*, we are finally coming to the first sūtra. When approaching such a mystical text, I want to draw attention to the most essential requirements for understanding. One is spiritual and the other linguistic. It is a truism that a spiritual or mystical text can only be received if the reader or listener—uh—has some spiritual practice or experience. It is just like a scientific text can be understood only by somebody who has some experience of science. This is the whole question of hermeneutics, where the tool has to correspond to the subject. 

The other condition for understanding is the language. It's not only a question of knowing Sanskrit, but of having access to the specific meaning in the context of, for example, Yoga or Tantra, where the words have a different meaning than in the dictionary. Here the tradition is necessary, whether through a commentary or through an oral transmission from a guru. 

After these preliminary remarks, let us come to sūtra one: **Mahāsāhasavṛttyā svarūpalābhaḥ**.

First, I read my own translation, and then we come to each word of this sūtra. My translation: "By the mode of great intensity, one attains one's true nature." Or, an alternative translation, also from me: "By the operation of the great suddenness, one's essential being is attained." And in the translation of the *maṅgala*, where it is called *sāhasavṛṭa*—the excellent *sāhasa*—I had also translated it as "sudden inspiration". 

Now we have to… It is well known in the Indian tradition that a sūtra can have many different meanings, even opposite ones. And Abhinavagupta says in the commentary to the *Parātrīśikātantra*: "A sūtra can have infinite meanings." Now this is the case here, where even the living—uh—*ācārya* of the tradition until last century, Swāmi Lakṣmaṇjoo, he did not accept the commentary by Anantaśaktipadā and he had his own interpretation from the commentary. And I, of course, I accept both, and uh… we will go into a little bit in the difference of the interpretation. Now, the richness of meaning of a sūtra is precisely contained in this multiple—uh—interpretations and meanings.

Now let us consider every word of this sūtra before coming back to the translation and commentary. 

* **Sāhasa**: We have already encountered it, uh, where I translated it as "sudden inspiration". Now, the meanings derived from the adjective *sahas* are "suddenness", "immediacy", "the unexpected", "unpredictable", "the powerful". 
* **Mahā**: Of course, it just raises it to the—uh—supreme, uh, transcendental level. 

The interpretation varies whether these qualities are attributed to the divine or to the absolute or to the practitioner or to the yogi. And this is very interesting because, for example, Swāmi Lakṣmaṇjoo, he attributes it to the yogi and he calls it "great courage". So the yogi or the practitioner must have great courage to discover or to realize his own nature. But the other interpreters, uh, understand it as an attribute to the divine—that the divine… it is not called like that, but that suddenness which comes from an act, as you will see in the commentary, an act of grace of Śaktipadā. Now, I have preferred the word "intensity" because it is neutral and it can apply to both the absolute and the practitioner. Because our—our intensity has to correspond to the divine. 

Now, **vṛtti** is a very crucial word here to understand. It has so many meanings! Of course, we know from the *Yogasūtra*: *citta vṛtti*, the movements of the mind. But the meanings are, for example, can be "an attitude", "a state", "a condition", "an action", "a movement", "a function", "an operation", "a cause", or "a mode"! It's one of these Sanskrit words which can have so many—uh—applications. Now, I have understood *vṛtti* in the sense of a mode. A mode like a mode of operation, like we have it in the computer also: different modes. But also a condition or a state. Some of the interpreters and translators have taken it to mean a state. The interesting thing is that this—that Sanskrit is so wonderful for these multiple meanings—that it is both a movement and a state, both dynamic and static. It is not one or the other. 

Now, the compound is **mahāsāhasavṛttyā svarūpalābhaḥ**. *Mahāsāhasavṛttyā* is an instrumental: "that through which" one attains one's true nature. Now, what means **svarūpa**? Those of course… *svarūpa* is a term which is used in the whole of Kashmir Śaivism for the true essential nature. Whereas *sāhasa* has not been used in any important—uh—meaning in Kashmir Śaivism in other texts. In the *Tantrāloka*, Abhinavagupta gives the—the briefest definition of *mokṣa* (liberation). He says, "What is *mokṣa*? *Svarūpaprathana*." It is the unfolding of one's true nature. This unfolding or revelation or expansion of the true nature… And I find this is such an extraordinary—um—universal definition of *mokṣa*. It does not say about Śiva vision or unity or anything, but your own true being, your own true nature. And Swāmi Lakṣmaṇjoo in his commentary says truly that we are mostly not living in our true nature. We are far away from it. Now, this attainment—*svarūpalābhaḥ*—"attainment" does not mean to get something which we do not have. "Attainment" means to become what we truly are. And it is not a—an acquisition of something, but it is as in the definition of Abhinavagupta: it is the unfoldment of our true being, of our true nature. And of course, in the whole—uh—context of the philosophy of recognition, it is a matter only of recognition and not of acquiring something which we are not.

Now we come back to the commentary to the sūtra and to the commentary. Commentary by Anantaśaktipadā: "Attaining one's true nature can happen to anyone, anywhere, anytime, suddenly, unexpectedly. When one is absorbed in one's very own essence by an excessively powerful, unfettered descent of grace (*śaktipadā*)—by the mode of great intensity or suddenness—such a universal statement is not depending on any condition. And that is why suddenness and unexpectedness is the quality of that which we don't name otherwise except *Anuttaravilāsa*."

Continue with the commentary: "It is attained by the full expansion of the all-absorbing supreme sound (*paranāda*), being established in an absorption in the great void (*mahāśūnyatā samāveśa*) which is unobstructed due to the unification of all thoughtful and thought-free processes of consciousness." Now, this great supreme sound… The later sūtras—and we'll speak about the levels of the word and the—the sound—uh—that mystical sound, uh, that also called *anahatanāda*, the mystical sound. That will be developed in the sūtras later on. But it is connected with that attainment of one's true nature and entering, being absorbed in that great voidness. 

Continue the translation: "It is by transcending all conceptions or imaginations that one attains the consciousness which is non-artificial (*akṛtaka*), without any occasion, unsurpassed, free from fluctuations, boundless, without distinctive sign, untouched and untouched by anything outside. This is the secret meaning (*rahasyārtha*) of the sūtra." 

Now it is clear here that this *svarūpa* which is attained by means—by, through that great intensity—it is the pure consciousness and pure consciousness which is non-artificial. Now, this is a translation of *akṛtaka*. And, uh, that means "not something made", not something imagined, uh, or created either by thought or by anything else. That is the real attribute of the pure consciousness and that true nature, *svarūpa*.

Now, this is the commentary by Anantaśaktipadā, and then he ends by saying: "Penetration in the true nature by the mode of the great intensity of suddenness will be taught, but the process leading to it…" That he introduces the following sūtras. Like in practically all sūtratexts which stand at the beginning of a school, like *Brahmasūtra*, *Yogasūtra*, *Śivasūtra*, the first sūtra contains the whole teaching in a nutshell. And the following sūtras go into the process and the details. Therefore, this is a very powerful beginning, summing up the experience that will be unfolded and a secret. Not to forget: a sūtra is also a basis for meditation. 
