Namaste. 

In the first introduction, we have taken a step to enter this mystical text through the first benedictory verse, or *maṅgala*. I love to compare these verses to the entrance gates, or *gopuraṁs*, of a temple, which prepare you to enter into the presence of the deity. And in the *maṅgalas* they prepare you and attune you to that mystical teaching which is following. And what is in the temple? What is the the sanctum? 

Supreme consciousness in this text and in any other, uh, spiritual scripture. 

Today we continue passing through these *maṅgala* gates, which open the way toward what is following in the 13 *sūtras* of *Vātula Tanta*. 

No name is given to the absolute. It is only described in negative terms like *anuttara*, the unsurpassed; *aja*, the unborn, which is all-transcending. But one image is given which is characteristic for the whole spirit of the text. It is described as the limitless sky of consciousness. Therefore, the vision mentioned in the first verse is only possible for the one who moves in the space of consciousness, *cit*.

Now we find in these verses a description of how the *sūtras* have been received by *Vātula Nātha*. On the one hand, they are said to have arisen "from the ocean of his heart," the ocean being another image for the limitless vastness of consciousness. On the other hand, the way of revelation is given that he has received the *sūtras* from the mouth of the *yoginīs*. And these *yoginīs* are identified with the goddesses who are presiding over the sacred seats of *pīṭhas*, *pīṭhasthās*. And in the esoteric sense, the *yoginīs* are also the divine essences. The revelation of the *sūtras* is thus a collaboration between these divine powers and the author. One *sūtra* is precisely dedicated to the union of *siddhas* and *yoginīs*, uh, and we will come to that.

In one verse, the commentator makes a bold statement about his spiritual state which can inspire us for our own practice: "Being always established in the center of all activities and remaining unaffected." What a lesson to learn and to apply specifically in times of crisis or of, uh, extreme activity! But the condition is "to enter the great space," which is the same as the sky of consciousness, the limitless openness. And the process of entering has to be followed by being established. Thus in one verse we find the whole spiritual progression: entering the great space, remaining established in the center, and being unaffected by the external and internal activities. 

The introductory *maṅgala* verses end with a statement about the origin of the *śa-sūtras* and the commentary, which has been composed, and it is said it is empowered by the inspiration and experience of the supreme reality or the supreme principle, *paratattva*.

The first *sūtra*, which we shall consider in the next teaching, has a significant introduction. It tells the story how the mystical teaching has been received orally by *Vātula Nātha* from the goddesses residing on the *pīṭhas*. When I use the word "mystical," it is a translation of *rahasya*, *rahasya krama*, or *parama rahasya*, the supreme secret. It can also be called esoteric. This secret has been passed on from *guru* to disciple for centuries before it was brought down to a written form and then published in a book. And today the medium has changed to online communication, but, to my mind, its power is still there, but it has to be received in a state of emptiness. And emptiness [is] symbolized by the great sky. In this introduction to the first *sūtra*, the commentator states that this teaching actually cannot be taught. It is unspeakable. It is beyond all doctrines, beyond the systems of philosophy, or *darśanas*, even beyond the different schools of *Tantra*. And here the goddesses teach, with quotation, the highest reality, which is impenetrable, which is free from all from the stain of all dualities: the duality of time and timelessness, being and nonbeing, duality and unity, thought and thought-free, because this teaching is from the point of view of direct experience. 

In the first *sūtra* we will get a summary and a glimpse of the entire revelation of these 13 *sūtras*. We will go into it in the next session.
