We recite again a new–two new ślokas at the beginning, but then tomorrow we will repeat all the ślokas which we have learned. But there's no recitation session tomorrow. The program is different. But still, we will have a chance to–at the beginning of our sharing session, we can recite all the ślokas. Remind you. 

So, number 11, it is devoted to the Devī:

> Jñāsy amantava viśvam idaṃ tvadbhāti bhāryābhāsaṃ āsamanam viśeṣataḥ śuddhekṣineh uttarāyaṃ sthitvāṃ vande teviṃ svātmasaṃviddhim ekāṃ naraśakticiśvātmikam hṛdaye yāpi nidāyam āśaye praṇamāmi paramānutarāṃ nijabhāsāṃ pratibhācam akṛtim. 

This wonderful verse is by Abhinavagupta–to his great work by Ṛṣi Kashmiri.

Before we come back to the text, uh, let us discuss the program because now we are nearly [at] the end, and tomorrow it's a different program. 

First question is: **who is living?** Living means before we end–we end tomorrow after lunch. So, those who are living before, uh, I request you to–to give your feedback in writing because, uh, we will be busy there. So, that–what are you feeling like? 

Well, I have some, uh, idea which I want to convey for the feedback session. But those who are living–either–is it already tomorrow morning or where? Tomorrow morning? Ah? Tomorrow morning. Yeah. Yeah. So, I hope everybody is here till this evening. Yeah. So, kindly give some feedback in writing. 

Then tomorrow, the program is announced outside. It is, uh, that one-hour session of feedback, but feedback will not be about Kashmiri Shaivism. Maybe we have to postpone the, uh, summaries of the program. Maybe we–we have to postpone the, uh, what this– *tribe*– *kaum*–closing ceremony. I think we don't need two hours for a consensus, so we can, uh, complete our feedback and then have a closing ceremony. In between, I serve both a couple of tea. Okay. 

Then I am already telling you now because–so you have one night to think about it. What I expect is not that you say, "It was very nice," or "It was very boring," or anything like that. But if–please select one text or one idea which has especially struck you, or which has, uh, given you some inspiration for your own practice and for your own entering into this spiritual tradition. It can be a short text, one verse maximum. One verse which has especially spoken to you and touched you, uh, yeah, experientially or practically or whatever. But not too general. It should be focused. 

And, uh, again for this evening program at the Kalaśa-yātrā, uh, we haven't affixed [a] time, but maybe 8:15? If dinner is at 7:00, then we can be back here at 8:15. But you can–we can have a quick look at this scheme which you have got in the morning. Uh, I think it's very beautiful and informative. We have *tantra*–the three, uh, trends of *jñāna*. Two are related to *mantra* and, of course, *ritual tantra*, and which we have not gone into. Then *sūkṣma*–this *yoga* in the specific sense. And that *yoga* is *sūkṣma yoga* in the chapter 7, which is divided into *laya-krama* and *śaktopaya-krama*. And chapter 8 is *jñāna*, uh, which is the *parājñāna*. And, from that, *aṣṭāṅga yoga* and then the four types of *samādhi*. But where I don't fully agree with [the] Stokey's scheme is that actually *jñāna* is connected to *parājñāna*. *Para-parājñāna*. So, there should be a connection because, uh, *parājñāna* is *jñāna*. Also, it is also *yoga*, of course, but *yoga* of the highest type. So, otherwise, the scheme, I think, is clear and you can keep it in the background. 

Yeah, we stopped at 37. Yes, I know that. At this top of the page where he distinguishes between *sāpāśa* and *nirupāśa*.  *Sāpāśa* means both Śiva and the *yogī* connected with manifestation or, uh, integrated manifestation. *Sāpāśa*. So, 38, uh, was a transition from *sāpāśa* to *nirupāśa*. And when I say it's not always clear whether he speaks of Śiva or of the *yogī*, but–but often it's clear he speaks of the *yogī*. 

We have to repeat 38. Uh, we have already recited it. Only the translation. He reflects upon the multiplicity of differentiation, and it's called–with manifestation–*sāpāśa*. Now, I will tell about *nirupāśa* manifestation. *Nirupāśa*. That is from 39 onwards. Now, this–between–between *ānanda* and *nimitta*, he believed in the world of multiplicity. And they can [be] integrated into consciousness in this form of *sāpāśa*. So, the specific contribution of Kashmiri Shaivism is also that this system is believing. It does not exclude multiplicity. And Abhinavagupta has, uh, a lot of reflection on the beauty of multiplicity. The multiplicity is a manifestation of the divine. So, why [exclude] it? So, the *yogī*–especially, of course, the *jīvanmukta* who lives in the world, in the body, etcetera–he has to integrate that manifestation. But there is also a state of complete detachment from manifestation. It's called *nirupāśa*. 

Uh, the commentary–he speaks at this point because he has no expectations. This is the point. But a *siddha*–you can only be *paratantra* if you have no expectation of something more fulfilling, more beautiful, more, uh, blissful, etcetera. No. He's already fulfilled or–[he is] fully satisfied. Nothing can shake him. So, this all relates to the *yogī*. He has no expectation and he is an intensified bliss of consciousness–*cidānandamaya*. He's "without beginning" means that his state does not arise due to the practice of contemplation. "Without beginning" means without any cause: *anādimat na tu bhāvanāmuktaḥ*. So, this is, uh–I may have given another meaning to this "without beginning," uh, in the morning session. But, in the practice, that you don't think that you are awakening–your enlightenment has come out from a particular practice. *Kevala-bhāvanā*. He doesn't go into detail, but definitely, it has to do with *śaktipāt* that–that enlightenment is not a cause-effect thing. Otherwise, it would be easy: just practice this much and then the result will be supreme. But, no. It's not a cause-effect. You practice, you do whatever, but don't, uh, attribute your enlightenment to your spiritual practice. This is what it means. Not how–

His free means that he does not depend on the maturation of *karma*–like in the case of the dualists. We have–at some point, we were speaking about *karma* and the importance of *karma* for determining our spiritual state. But I must say that the Kashmiri Shaivites are very critical of an overestimation of *karma*. That in many systems, you know, as if *karma* determines all our–even spiritual states, experiences and practices, etcetera. But this is very–the freedom of this Shiva is precisely freedom from determination by *karma*. But *karma-mala* means impurity due to *karma*. He cannot lose–means that his state is not covered by sleep, etcetera. He has infinite energies: *ananta-śaktikah*. And there he is quoted from–I think it was– *antaḥ śaktyā śivā śaktasya vam*–his energies constitute the entire universe. This being the case, he has the universal body of the form of the sun–sun, very often–*mārīcya-rūpā śrīśa śrī śivassadāśiva*. A universal body of the form of the sun. This is a mystical statement which I don't want to comment upon.

So, he goes on, uh, commenting on [the]–upon every quality of the *yogī* who is *sarvabhaksa*–respiration. Now, Hema Shiva will explain the state free from manifestation: *nirābhāsa*. And here comes something extraordinary. As far as I have read tantric literature, this is something quite extraordinary because Shiva–if the *tantra* is revealed by Shiva, it should be either the *tantra-avatāra* who speaks or Shiva or the Devī. But here it is obviously the *yogī*. The *yogī* who speaks in a state of ecstasy. This [is] definitely not Shiva–it is the *yogī*.

Now we recite the ninth–forty-fourth:

> *na ahaṃ asmi na cānyo'sti nirābhāsā sadābhavet sāvasthā paramā proktā śivasyā paramātmanaḥ*

> *na ahaṃ asmi na cānyo'sti kiṃ cātra vidyate ānandapatalaśśśīnaṃ manaḥ samarasīgataṃ*

> *na utveghyaṃ prayuñjīta na adaḥ sthānaśamatvataḥ na agrataḥ priṣṭhatā kiṃ cit pāśvayoḥ rūpayorapi*

> *na antaḥ śarīrasaṃsthāne na āvyoḥ avyayetvaci na akāśebandaye lakṣyaṃ na akṣu dṛṣṭiṃ niveśayet na cakṣurnimīlanaṃ kiṃ cin kiṃ cin dṛṣṭibandhaṃ avalambaṃ nirālambaṃ sālambaṃ na ca avaye nendriyāṇi na bhūtāni śabda sparśa rasādyāḥ sarvaṃ yatvā samatheṣā kevalaṃ tanmayo'bhavet*

"I am not, nor is there any other. In that state, no object of meditation is to be found." Thirty-nine–again forty. 

"I am not, nor is there any other. He attains that state beyond manifestation. This state is called the supreme state of Shiva, the highest Self." 

Now, this, uh–it's like an exclamation of the *yogī* who is in an *nirābhāsa* state–who is beyond–beyond manifestation, beyond duality. It is a complete elimination of the individual ego. And in that way, also, all the duality between myself and the other, between subject and object. And the fact that it is repeated in the next verse–it gives [it] more stress. It is something like the *yogī* in a state of ecstasy: "I am not, nor is there any other." He realizes the one who has gone beyond all manifestation, consisting in the reflection–differentiated–differentiating between subject and object–and reflects on consciousness as the one absolute reality is called *nirābhāsa*. 

And he quotes the *Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā* by Utpaladeva:

> The one who is ever full, having dissolved all the mass of elements within him–He is Shiva, intensified bliss of consciousness and an embodiment of intelligence. 

Pleasure consciousness is *cit-vimarsha-śaktipramāta*. The *yogī* who has attained such a state, he describes it in aphorisms–it's sort of the state. 

Again, he repeats:

> *na ahaṃ asmi na cānyo'sti* 

"I am not, nor is there any other." In that state, no object of meditation is to be found. His mind is immersed in a state of bliss. It has obtained the flavor of unity–now, this is another translation of *samarasyagatam*. He has become of one flavor–of bliss.

So, which is that *aham*? We have encountered several levels of *aham*. When you recite–in one of the kinds of *samādhi*, you recite *śivo'ham*. At the *jīvo'ham*. So that is the supreme "I" that is in the divine. But here at this very minute, which is completely–not denied, but just vanishes. That is why, uh, Shiva in this case–*aham* here means "I"–means here the subject identified with the body. So, we had before also that we have to de-identify ourselves–that–or the consciousness, mind, etcetera. But here it is actually achieved, and that "I" is the limited subject identified with the body. "So, I am not, nor is there any other." So that duality of subject-object is just vanished. The other–*anya*–means to separate from you: who is or what is also an external thing. There is nothing else–not only [a] person. So, this general–this "I" means the subject consisting of the body, etcetera, and the other who is different from myself is the object such as blue, etcetera. Blue is always an example given for an objective reality. Like the sky is blue. The object of meditation is that which is established in the intellect by the subject. So, that is why we have this, uh, definition of *dhyāna* in [the] *Utpaladeva*, where it is derived from the intellect.

Now, having attained such a state–the God reveals the Shambhavopāya–this is the doctrine by the Shaivites. Is that better? *laghāyaḥ śāmbhavopāyaḥ ādeśikadevataḥ*. 

So, Shambhavopāya–we have seen is the highest of the three *upāyas*, leaving aside *ānupāya*, which is not an *upāya* at all, and therefore we don't need to discuss it here. But *Shambhavopāya* is the highest [of]–means the highest way. And now comes a whole negation, negation, negation. A whole series of negations. See, before you have been told to meditate on this, to meditate on that, to, uh, concentrate on this and that. Now everything is negated. All meditation [is] gone. Because when [in] a state of *nirābhāsa*, so, it is–there's nothing to hold. The reality is that–because who is the one who holds something? It's the subject. It's the limited "I". So, even if it is a very wonderful "I"–of a *yogī* who practices and who is very sincere, etcetera–but still [an] ego. But once he has attained that state–*na ahaṃ asmi na cānyo'sti*–there is nothing to practice. So, this is very, uh, wonderful because the very–the way in which Abhinavagupta comments on it. And therefore those of you who know the Shiva Sutra, that the whole passage is quoted in the Shiva Sutra by Abhinavagupta–I have to–you don't have the text here now. 

Now, from forty-one to forty-four, he [gives] a series of negations: "One should not direct one's meditation towards something above, nor below, nor in the middle, neither before nor behind, nor on either side. One should not contemplate any place within or outside the body. One should not fix one's attention towards the sky, nor should one direct one's gaze downwards. One should neither meditate with closed eyes nor by fixing one's eyes without blinking. One should neither meditate on a support nor without a support nor with the help of any support." It's almost like Nagarjuna who is denying–that–the negations, etcetera. One should focus neither on the senses nor on elements nor on sensual perceptions like sound, touch, taste, etcetera. 
