Start the session with *atīndriyabuddhyā yuktivi kāśitena śarīreṇa pratyekam arasāhasaṁ varivarnanaṁ sarvasaṁsāravāsanāṁ kṣayāya* || *om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om* *atīndriyabuddhyā yuktivi kāśitena śarīreṇa pratyekam arasāhasaṁ varivarnanaṁ sarvasaṁsāravāsanāṁ kṣayāya* || *om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om om* *atīndriyabuddhyā yuktivi kāśitena śarīreṇa pratyekam arasāhasaṁ varivarnanaṁ sarvasaṁsāravāsanāṁ kṣayāya* || 

We are in the middle of the V interpretation of the *aṣṭāṅgayoga*, and uh, I have a list of questions, but I will keep it at the end of the session. That's right. That's right. Now we may feel that we are not yet *para yogis*, and uh, this is too much above our heads and too subtle and too difficult, et cetera. But just the comparison here would be if you have not yet climbed Mount Everest or not done any pilgrimage to Kailash. And yet, you listen to somebody who has, and then and who shares their experience, and that itself has an elevating effect. 

And so also, when you approach a scripture or a spiritual text, there are two ways. Either you try to bring it down to your pedestrian level, so that you can make it more uh, comprehensible, and easier et cetera. Or you try to elevate yourself to the level of that uh spiritual text. So, we should not despair that in between these two, there are things which we don't fully understand. Fully understand would be of course already a level of enlightenment, but uh at least even we will be elevated by this, that there is such a verified experience and level of *yoga* like on the high Himalayas, even if we have not yet climbed up there. 

So I think um even like high poetry, you may not be a poet yourself. But still, that poetry can elevate you to an inspiration. So, let us approach the text in this spirit. 

And before we proceed, uh, uh I will already quote *Kṣemarāja*, because he says that this whole interpretation is from the point of view, *lokottara kriyā pratipatti*. It's from the point of view of [the] transcendental point of view. *Lokottara kriyā*. So, it's not from the point of view of the Buddhist *yogi* who still has to climb the steps and understand so many things. But from *lokottara kriyā* and that is what [it] says explicitly at any rate in this. But uh, not *lokottarakriyā*. 

Now, uh I will come back also to that whole group of uh *aṣṭāṅga*. And here I have responded to something which some of the verses Deva has said about it, who has of course specialized on the *yoga* of the *Netratantra*, which is quite different. See, all these *yoga* systems in Shaivism, they are uh complementary, but something coincide and others are different. So, they're very uh very rich uh tradition of *yoga*. So, when he speaks about this reinterpretation of *aṣṭāṅgayoga*, he says in a sense the yogic scheme of the latter tantra is redundant. This form [of] ours has to be meditated upon with uh this form, with this, how many arms, then so on. And this then the images which you see here, actually the artists who made that image they have to follow the *dharma śāstra*. How that image, how that deity is described and this, that. So this is uh that he transcends all these forms which are described in the *tantra*. They are to be transcended because the Lord is formless, abiding, immutable, and eternal. He is one's own consciousness which is one's own life. 

So *saṃvedanam śabda-ākāśam* this is a beautiful identity - identification. So *saṃvedanam* one's own uh experience also which is one's in-innermost light. He is to be meditated upon, means he's worthy of meditation, but he is not meditatable in the sense of an object of meditation. He's to be reflected upon and remembered with awareness which means meditating on the Supreme Lord, who is intensified consciousness and bliss. Take out the, the Karma. A vision uh reflecting thus the wise, that is the knowers of reality, know this to be meditation which is reflective awareness on him which means they know it by an unbroken tradition and that is the meaning. Reflective awareness is again *vimarśa*, *vimarśa*. So *prakāśa* and *vimarśa*. And *prakāśa* is *Śiva*, *vimarśa* is *śakti*, and *vimarśa* is that what the *yogi* can do, not *dhyāna*. *Vimarśa* is not in a dualistic relationship with *prakāśa*, that would be dual. *Prakāśa* and *vimarśa* [are] not as united with *Śiva* and yet can be differentiated. This is the whole - this is *dhyāna*. 

The next is *dhāraṇā*. You recited the 16th *dhāraṇā paramātmatvaṃ dhāryate yena sarvadā dhāraṇāsau avinirddiṣṭā avadhāraṇā vināśinī*. Now he plays at the uh etymology of *dhāraṇā* that's comes from the root *dhṛ* to hold, to fast. When the nature of the Supreme Self is at all times held in consciousness, that is real *dhāraṇā*. That is the final *dhāraṇā* which dissolves the bonds of worldly existence. 

Uh we have here *Patañjali Yoga Sūtra*. But may I request, Swami, that if you can quote the respective *sūtra*, because otherwise I [am] too much distracted. I - I have it here. Oh, you have it. Uh, that - you have [the] definition of *dhyāna* and *dhāraṇā*. So - these are the first two *sūtras* in - first *dhyāna*. *Dhyāna* is uh *tatra pratyayaikatānatā dhyānam*. So in that concentration or its locus, single unbroken continuous flow is called meditation. And now you can compare. And *dhāraṇā*, *dhāraṇā deśa bandhaścittasya dhāraṇā*. This is uh *sūtra* one in uh - fixing the mind at a locus is called concentration. Holding, a focus. Yeah. It's the same. Also, grave is with uh *dhṛ* to hold, to fix, fix the attention of the mind on. But here and there, of course, in the realm of theistic *yoga*, it is in potentially of course, you have the alternative *īśvara-praṇidhāna-dvārā*. You can also uh meditate on *īśvara*. But you have other alternatives without *īśvara*. And here it's definitely theistic. It is related to the divine. And therefore, *dhāraṇā paramātmatvaṃ dhāryate yena sarvadā*. When the nature of the Supreme Self is at all times held in consciousness, that is *dhāraṇā*, which dissolves the bonds of worldly existence. 

So holding - he also uses this metaphor of fixation, but I don't like the word too much. Uh all this words of concentration, fixation, they have some other implications which are also uh spiritual. I think commentary is brief: The yogi by whom the nature of the Supreme Self, which is consciousness, is held in continuous absorption. This *dhāraṇā*, this is practice consisting in the nature of reflection of consciousness. In distinction to different forms of concentration or lack of concentration, this is defined as dissolving the worldly bonds. This held in continuous absorption: *sarvadā paramātmatvaṃ cetanyaṃ dhāryate samaveśena avadadhāryate*. It's very - yeah, the Sanskrit is not difficult there, but you must follow it. 

See, the nature of the Supreme Self is consciousness, *cetanā*. First *sūtra* of the *Śiva Sūtras*: "*Caitanyaṃ ātmā*." The innermost nature of everything. Not only the *ātman* of individuals, but [the] innermost nature of everything is consciousness. And that consciousness is *Śiva*. *Śiva Sūtra* doesn't start with *Śiva*. [It] start[s] with *caitanya*. Because everything is pervaded by consciousness. So what the *yogi* has to do, if he has anything to do, is to hold. Holding means that uh continuous, as he says again and again, not formally, formally, but otherwise, more concentration, but continuous concentration, continuous absorption, which consists, and then you asked me the question, how to focus, how to sharpen our awareness? And this is the whole question [of] practice. He would say, "And with this kind of tautology, that consciousness which is of the nature of self-reflective awareness." Now, what is this consciousness, what is reflective awareness? That's what we have to experience. It's not just the concept. 

Now, I think *dhyāna* and *dhāraṇā* are very clear and they are related to the *Yoga Sūtra*, but as *Kṣemarāja* says, they are transcendentally different from the higher, that level. And now, come from verse 17 to 34, five aims of *samādhi*. And this five you - I have not followed it definitely at that time. I have to look for that. But uh as far as I can remember, *Shiva Sūtra* doesn't speak of *samādhi*. But yet, they count only as - they are only aspects, they are not counted separately. They are only variations on one theme. So the introduction from that, *dhyāna* to this *samadhi*: The *yogi*, by whom the nature of the Supreme Self, that's all. After having expounded *yama*, *niyama*, *āsana*, *prāṇāyāma*, *pratyāhāra*, *dhyāna*, and *dhāraṇā* from the transcendental point of view, now he instructs also on *samādhi* as the subject of the Supreme nature. *Parasvarūpa-viṣayaḥ*. Accordingly to *ānanda, śakti*, and *śānta* means - and after attaining, then, *ānandopāya* and the following four *ślokas*. 

Now, this is *Kṣemarāja's* contribution to attribute these four variations of *samādhi* to the four *upāyas*. Now, who is not familiar with the four *upāyas*, and I can write it on the - I always like to do it visually, from below upwards. And I write it *upāya*. And this *upāya* means a way. *Ānanda* - it's not *Ananda*. *Ānanda* is derived from *ānū*. *Ānū* means the individual consciousness. Not being, that rate. So *ānū* uh it's the individual means. And why is [it] called individual means? Because it starts from an individual consciousness. If I consider myself separate from everybody else, from the and from the divine, etc., then I'm a member of *ānanda*. And then I have to do a lot of practice, a lot of effort, to come up to another level of consciousness. 

*Śakti* is the means of the energy, and there, by that, we have seen it already in the *pūrvaprakriyā*. And this [is] the *śakti* who is dominant, predominant. That's why all these - all these methods related to energy are belong to the *śakti*. But not only *śakti*, but also it is related to *dhyāna*. This is related to *kriyā*. Here, you have to do some action. You have to perform some *japa*, etc. And here, *śakti* is related to *dhyāna*, to notice, awareness. 

*Śāmbhava* is derived from *śambhu*. That is *Śiva*, that is the divine means, by divine ray. And then beyond that, is *anopāya*. That [is] no means - no means nothing is to be done.
